
--- PAGE 2 ---
Praise for Fast 5K and Pete Magill
“Pete Magill’s running career has shown he’s the ‘master of the 5K.’ This
guide-book proves that he’s also the best at teaching others how to improve
their 5K performance. Do what Pete says, and you’re sure to run stronger,
healthier, and faster.”
—AMBY BURFOOT, 1968 Boston Marathon winner and author of Run
Forever and The Runner’s Guide to the Meaning of Life
“If you want to run a faster 5K but don’t know where to start, Pete Magill
has done the research so you don’t have to. In Fast 5K, he combines years
of experience as a coach and competitor with the latest science to help you
get the most out of your training. He’s truly a 5K runner’s best friend.”
—CLAUDETTE GROENENDAAL, USA National Champion, NCAA
Champion, former NCAA Women’s national record holder for 800 meters
“I’ve said it before, and I’m saying it again: If you want to run faster, do
what Pete Magill says. It’s that simple.”
—SCOTT DOUGLAS, Runner’s World contributing writer and author of
Advanced Marathoning and The Athlete’s Guide to CBD
“Pete’s latest marvel of scholarship is a hoot to read and a treasure to
follow. Pete explodes all ignorance while sharing the most intelligent steps
to 5K excellence.”
—KEN STONE, founder and editor of Masterstrack.blog, contributing
editor for Times of San Diego
--- PAGE 3 ---
“Pete Magill’s Fast 5K is like having a personal coach at your fingertips.
His easy-to-digest keys break down the components of 5K training in a way
that will benefit runners of all abilities. You’ll want to read this book before
you start training for your next 5K—or you might get beat by someone who
did.”
—SEAN WADE, Olympic marathoner, masters world record holder, and
founder of the Kenyan Way
“Pete Magill is the Mr. Miyagi of running. He will build you up
comprehensively for a lifetime of happy running, and you won’t even have
to paint his fence or wax his car.”
—JAY DUPLASS, American film director, author, and actor
“This thorough book covers all aspects of training and racing the 5K, yet
reads with an easy familiarity, based on Magill’s experience as a runner,
coach, and student of the sport. Magill knows what you need to do to
improve and where you’re likely to make mistakes. Anyone who reads and
follows this book will undoubtably become a better runner and likely end
up with a 5K PR.”
—JONATHAN BEVERLY, editor-in-chief of PodiumRunner, and author of
Run Strong, Stay Hungry and Your Best Stride
“Whether you’re just starting out as a runner or starting afresh, you can do
no better than heed the guidance of running’s ultimate comeback kid, Pete
Magill.”
—MATT FITZGERALD, author of How Bad Do You Want It? and Racing
Weight
“Pete Magill must have found the fountain of youth. I coach college
students, and he consistently outruns half my team! He must know
something the rest of us don’t!”
--- PAGE 4 ---
—STEVE SCOTT, head track coach at Cal State San Marcos, 3-time
Olympian, former American record holder in the mile
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 5 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 7 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 8 ---
Copyright © 2019 by Pete Magill
Originally published in 2017 as Pete Magill’s 25 Keys to Running a Faster 5K by Pete Magill.
All rights reserved. Published in the United States of America by VeloPress, a division of Pocket
Outdoor Media.
4745 Walnut Street, Unit A
Boulder, CO 80301-2587
VeloPress is the leading publisher of books on endurance sports and is a division of Pocket Outdoor
Media. Focused on cycling, triathlon, running, swimming, and nutrition/diet, VeloPress books help
athletes achieve their goals of going faster and farther. Preview books and contact us at
velopress.com.
Distributed in the United States and Canada by Ingram Publisher Services
A Cataloging-in-Publication record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN 978-1-937715-92-2 (paperback); ISBN 978-1-948006-09-5 (ebook)
Art direction by Vicki Hopewell
Design by Graham Smith
Composition by Anita Koury
v. 3.1
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 9 ---
Contents
IntroductionA Fast 5K
PART ONE TRAINING KEYS
Key 1 Set a Reasonable Goal
Key 2 Schedule a Sensible Training Volume & Intensity
Key 3 Train All Your 5K Running Muscles
Key 4 Slow Down Your Distance Runs
Key 5 Split Tempo Runs into Repetitions
Key 6 Include VO2max Workouts
Key 7 Schedule Short Repetitions/Intervals
Key 8 Join the Over-the-Hill Gang
Key 9 Schedule Hill Repeats
Key 10Lengthen Your Long Run
Key 11 Try Downhill Running
Key 12Perform Goal-Pace Repetitions at the Right Time
Key 13Run a 5K Tune-Up Race
Key 14Schedule Injury-Prevention Exercises & Resistance Training
Key 15Schedule Technique Drills & Plyometrics
PART TWO LIFESTYLE, DIET & GEAR KEYS
--- PAGE 10 ---
Key 16Eat a Runner’s Diet
Key 17Run Light
Key 18Wear Light Racing Flats
Key 19Sleep, Rest, Recover
Key 20Review Non-Running Activities & Hobbies
PART THREE RACE-DAY KEYS
Key 21Try a Mini-Taper
Key 22Beat the Jitters
Key 23Race-Day Guidelines (Pre-Race)
Key 24Racing Guidelines
Key 25Assess Your Performance
Bonus Masters Key Age-Related Adjustments & Advice
PART FOUR WORKOUTS & TRAINING PLANS
1 Warm-Up Routines
2 Length of Distance Runs
3 Training Paces
4 Training Schedules
Beginner’s 12-Week Plan
2-Week Adjustment for 5K Race (Beginners)
12-Week Plan
16-Week Extended Plan
12-Week Low-Intensity Plan
2-Week Adjustment for 5K Race
--- PAGE 11 ---
Acknowledgments
Index
About the Author
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 12 ---
A note to readers: Double-tap on illustrations to enlarge them. After art is
selected, you may expand or pinch your fingers to zoom in and out.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 13 ---
Introduction
A Fast 5K
So you want to run a fast 5K.
But you’re not sure how to train for it—or, once trained, how to execute
the perfect race.
Relax. You’re not alone. Every year, between nine and ten million
Americans run a 5K race. Some are happy just to finish. But others, like
you, want more.
You want to run faster. Faster than you’ve run recently, faster than you
have in your current age group, or maybe faster than ever before.
And you suspect that if you could gain access to the training and racing
secrets that allow elite runners to log stellar race after stellar race, you, too,
could unlock the magic of your own 5K performance.
The good news is that you’re right: There are training, lifestyle, and
race adjustments that will make you a better and faster 5K runner.
The bad news is that there is no magic bullet—no single adjustment that
on its own will net you the performance you’re after.
There’s a Bateke proverb that goes like this: “The river swells with the
contribution of the small streams.” You’ll need to create your own “river”
by embracing a wide variety of key practices. That’s because the 5K is a
unique race that pairs the speed of a miler with the endurance of a
marathoner. Only a multifaceted approach—one that targets both speed and
endurance fitness—will yield your faster 5K.
Sound like a lot to put on your plate?
Again, relax. Training for a faster 5K has more to do with variety, fun,
and self-confidence than it does with pain, discipline, and sacrifice. The
trick is making sure that your training and lifestyle adjustments provide the
keys for unlocking your 5K potential. That’s what this book is all about.
--- PAGE 14 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 15 ---
PART
ONE
TRAINING
KEYS
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 16 ---
KEY
1
Set a Reasonable Goal
On the surface, this key seems simple: Set a 5K performance goal that is
manageable.
Yet this is where many runners make their first mistake.
A 25-minute 5K runner sets a goal of 22 minutes. Or an 18:30 runner
targets 16:45. Or another runner wants to somehow get faster in the four
weeks before a local 5K.
All these runners have one thing in common: They’re setting a
benchmark for success that is difficult, if not impossible, to achieve within a
reasonable training time frame. Often, the result will be a negative 5K race
experience.
A smarter performance goal is this: Run faster for your next 5K than
you did for your last one, and then continue to improve after that. At this
stage, don’t target an actual time; instead, be satisfied with improved fitness
and whatever time improvement that fitness yields. (You can target a
specific time in Key 12.)
This isn’t about embracing a Zen approach to the sport. It’s about
recognizing two important concepts that guide successful 5K training
programs:
1 Improvement is always incremental (and occurs at different rates for
different runners), making it counterproductive to train harder than
necessary to achieve incremental gains in performance.
2 Targeting a performance that can’t be achieved at your next 5K robs
you of the positive feedback you’ll experience from targeting a more
--- PAGE 17 ---
modest performance goal that’s within reach. Don’t create a negative
environment in which smaller, incremental improvements are viewed
as undeserving of celebration—or, worse yet, as failures.
This isn’t to imply that you shouldn’t have long-term performance goals
—including time-specific goals. Many high school, college, and open
runners target qualifying times for conference, regional, and national
competitions. Masters (age 40+) runners often want to match (or beat) times
they ran as younger athletes. And a specific goal time is easier to focus on
than the more abstract concept of incremental improvement. It’s just that
your primary goal should be to institute the type of training, lifestyle, and
race execution changes—represented by the keys in this book—that will
build the strongest physical version of your running body and remold your
mental approach to competition.
Besides, as your training takes hold and you begin to improve, you just
might discover that your original long-term 5K goal—rather than being too
optimistic—falls short of your true potential. You might end up running
faster than you thought possible.
“It’s not the will to win that matters—everyone has that. It’s the will to
prepare to win that matters.”
—Paul “Bear” Bryant, six-time national championship football coach at
the University of Alabama
Climbing the Steps to 5K Success
--- PAGE 18 ---
The key to successful 5K training isn’t setting overly ambitious time-related race goals. It’s
implementing effective training, lifestyle, and race-day strategies—patiently, incrementally, one step
at a time.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 19 ---
KEY
2
Schedule a Sensible Training Volume
& Intensity
“If I had five minutes to chop down a tree, I’d spend the first three
sharpening my axe.”
—Anonymous woodsman
Distance-running legend Gerry Lindgren, considered one of the greatest
American high school distance runners of all time, regularly logged 150 to
200 running miles per week. And Lindgren claimed, in a 2011 Runner’s
World interview, that “on the weekends when I didn’t have anything to do,
I’d get up early in the morning and take a sack lunch and run the whole day.
I’d sometimes get 100 miles a day during a weekend.” At the opposite end
of the spectrum, the USA’s only Olympic gold medalist at 5000 meters, Bob
Schul, trained all high-quality intervals. Schul’s morning workout consisted
of repetitions at 100, 150, and 200 meters, and his afternoon sessions
included repetitions from 100 to 400 meters. His Sunday workout was
twenty 400-meter repetitions, with the pace of each rep ranging from 54 to
60 seconds.
Lindgren was all about volume (i.e., overall mileage).
Schul prized intensity (i.e., hard effort).
Both were incredibly successful—and you won’t want to follow either’s
example.
--- PAGE 20 ---
Instead, adopt the Goldilocks approach: When it comes to volume and
intensity, you don’t want too much, and you don’t want too little; you want
a balance of both that’s “just right” for you.
So how do you determine what’s right for you?
First, don’t rely on generic prescriptions for volume and intensity. There
is no universal guideline for volume that works for all runners. There is no
breakdown of workout intensity—no percentage of hard running versus
easy running, no absolute total volume of work to be done at more intense
paces, no rigid cycle of hard and easy days—that is appropriate across all
ages, abilities, body types, levels of experience, and number of workout
days per week.
Instead, you’ll need to fall back on one of the oldest tricks in the
training book: trial and error. Using trial and error, you’ll aim to land on a
volume and intensity that:
Your body can handle without incurring injury or excessive fatigue
Targets all the physiological and psychological requirements of the
5K
Includes only incremental, periodic increases in volume and intensity
as you progress in your program—this can vary from as little as a 10
percent increase for runners who begin their program at high
volume/intensity to as much as 50 percent or more for runners who
start at a very low volume/intensity
Experienced runners should begin any new 5K training program with a
volume and an intensity that are similar to their current levels. Beginners
should start with a minimal training stimulus (e.g., walking). From there,
you’ll incrementally increase volume and intensity. To guide this increase,
there are two rules that are popular with runners.
The best-known rule is the 10 Percent Rule. This rule recommends
increasing volume at a rate of 10 percent per week, and it promises
improved fitness with minimal injury risk. The problem with the 10 Percent
Rule is that it’s too conservative for beginning runners and too aggressive
for experienced runners—plus, a 2007 study of more than 500 runners
found identical injury rates between those following the 10 Percent Rule
and those scheduling more rapid increases.
--- PAGE 21 ---
For low-volume runners, the 10% Rule creates mileage increases that are well below the body’s
ability to adapt. For higher volume runners, the 10% Rule leads to increases that are likely to produce
injury or burnout. The 3-Week Rule is more physiologically sound.
A better approach is the Three-Week Rule. After each jump in volume
and intensity, you give your body three weeks to adapt before scheduling
another major increase. This allows you to schedule regular, balanced
increases in volume and intensity with a decreased risk of injury. There are
several reasons why this is true:
While muscles can handle weekly increases in training, connective
tissue can’t—you end up with injuries such as Achilles tendinitis,
shin splits, and stress fractures. By limiting major increases to every
third week, you allow connective tissue time to adapt.
You exert more control over your program—you pick your eventual
goal workload, then distribute increases evenly to achieve that goal.
You decrease both physical and mental stress by allowing your body
to adapt to a workload before increasing it.
Eventually, you’ll discard the Three-Week Rule and schedule increases
using the method famously put forward by the late Dr. George Sheehan:
--- PAGE 22 ---
“Listen to your body.”
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 23 ---
KEY
3
Train All Your 5K Running Muscles
We humans have almost 700 different muscles. When you run a 5K, you
use most of them.
Unfortunately, if you’re like most runners, you’ve failed to train most of
the muscles—specifically, the muscle fibers—that you’ll use during a 5K.
This common training lapse can be attributed to two related
misconceptions:
1 The belief that individual muscles (e.g., your hamstrings or biceps)
are single units in which all muscle fibers are turned “on” or “off” as
one—for example, the belief that all the muscle fibers in your calf
muscle contract if you go up on your tippy toes.
2 The belief that all running workouts train all muscle fibers within a
working muscle—it’s just that some workouts train fibers more
intensely than others (e.g., thinking a distance run trains all the
muscle fibers in your leg muscles, just less intensely than 400-meter
reps at 5K pace).
Reality check: Your running muscles do not function as single units;
each muscle uses only as many of its muscle fibers as is required to perform
an activity.
In fact, you use only a small percentage of the muscle fibers in your leg
muscles for low-key exercises, such as walking. Similarly, distance runs
recruit far fewer muscle fibers than you’ll use running a 5K—and almost
none of the fibers you’ll need to run that 5K fast.
--- PAGE 24 ---
Each one of your muscles is composed of three types of muscle fibers:
Slow-twitch
Intermediate fast-twitch (we’ll just call these “intermediate” from now
on)
Fast-twitch
When you exercise, these fibers are recruited in a “ladder.” The first
rung of the ladder is slow-twitch. You use almost exclusively slow-twitch
fibers for low-intensity work, such as walking and jogging. As the intensity
of your activity increases (e.g., you pick up your pace during a run,
accelerating from jogging to a less-conversational effort), you move up a
rung in the ladder, adding intermediate fibers, which produce more power
and contract more quickly than slow-twitch fibers. If your intensity
increases even more (e.g., you run up a steep hill or sprint to the 5K finish
line), you add fast-twitch fibers to the mix, which are even bigger cells and
contract fastest and most powerfully of all. When you’re simultaneously
using all three muscle-fiber types, you’ve reached the top rung of the
ladder.
The chart, Muscle Fiber Types Used at Various Paces, illustrates the
percentage of each fiber type that’s required to maintain different paces.
(Keep in mind that real-world fiber recruitment will vary from person to
person.) From the chart, you can see that running a fast 5K requires training
a lot of muscle fibers. I’ve had runners complain to me after a 5K, “Wow,
I’m really sore!” They’re sore because they trained only slow-twitch fibers
in preparation for the race (e.g., they stuck to an all-distance diet) and toed
the start line with untrained intermediate and fast-twitch fibers. Those faster
fibers simply weren’t ready to race.
“The strength of the team is each individual member. The strength of each
member is the team.”
—Phil Jackson, 11-time NBA championship coach
--- PAGE 25 ---
At different paces, you recruit different percentages of your muscle fibers. 5K race pace recruits all
slow-twitch fibers, most intermediate fibers, and more than 50 percent of fast-twitch fibers.
Let’s say a farmer wants to plant his field. First, he plows it. Next, he
plants seeds. Finally, he waters a third of the field. On the next day, he
waters the same third of the field. And on the next, the same third. This
goes on every day, the farmer watering the same third of the field. After a
month, crops are only growing on the third of the field the farmer has
watered. He can’t figure out what’s gone wrong. Hey, dummy, you only
watered a third of your field! Don’t be a dummy. Water your entire field.
To train each muscle-fiber type for maximum performance, you’ll need
to schedule a variety of workouts. We’ll discuss specific workouts that
allow you to target your full range of fibers in Keys 4 through 15. For now,
understand that a major key to 5K preparation is training all the muscle
fibers you’ll use to achieve your best performance.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 26 ---
KEY
4
Slow Down Your Distance Runs
“Good things come slow, especially in distance running.”
—Bill Dellinger, Olympian and five-time NCAA championship coach
Distance runs are the primary way you train slow-twitch muscle fibers.
Most runners understand that it’s the cumulative volume of distance
runs that provides the foundation for success as a distance runner. That’s
true whether you’re training for a 5K or a marathon. That said, runners
make a mistake when they assume that up-tempo distance runs are more
effective than runs performed at a comfortable effort level. In fact, many
runners sabotage their training by doing their distance runs too hard.
First, let’s dispel a running myth: Running your distance runs slowly
won’t make you a slow runner. Training incorrectly—not doing the full
range of workouts required to build speed—will make you a slow runner.
The correct pace for your distance runs is the pace that guarantees
you’ll get 100 percent of the benefits you’re hoping to reap from those runs.
So step one (as with any workout) is to determine those targeted benefits.
For distance runs, the training adaptations you’re after include:
Strengthening slow-twitch muscle fibers
Strengthening connective tissue like bones and tendons
Increasing the number and size of mitochondria (microscopic, aerobic
energy–producing power plants) within each slow-twitch fiber
--- PAGE 27 ---
Increasing the number of capillaries surrounding each slow-twitch
fiber (capillaries are tiny blood vessels that carry oxygen and
nutrients to your muscle fibers)
Increasing the amount of carbohydrate fuel (i.e., glycogen) stored
within each slow-twitch fiber
Strengthening your heart, so that you can pump more blood with each
heartbeat
Improving your nervous system’s ability to recruit slow-twitch fiber
into action, thereby creating a more efficient stride and reducing the
amount of energy you’ll expend
To trigger all these adaptations, you need to run at about 65–75 percent
VO2max. In layman’s terms, that means running at a conversational pace—
about two minutes per mile slower than 5K pace for faster runners, and up
to three minutes per mile for slower runners. At that effort level, your body
receives the correct stimulus. Equally important, you’ll recover in time for
the next day’s workout. Run harder than that, and you recruit faster fibers,
creating nervous-system fatigue and increasing your use of anaerobic
energy, both of which lengthen the time you’ll need for recovery. See the
Training Paces table (p. 128) for pacing guidelines.
If you’re still having trouble keeping your foot off the accelerator, try
leaving your watch at home. If you know how far a run is, you don’t need to
time it. Going watchless removes the temptation to speed up and allows you
to settle into a pace that’s appropriate for the day—one that matches your
fatigue level, the temperature, that stiff lower back from sitting at a desk for
eight hours, or some other variable that might affect your pace on that
specific day.
--- PAGE 28 ---
At 70 percent VO2max, distance runs work a large percentage of slow-twitch fibers, while recruiting
only a small percentage of intermediate fibers and almost no fast-twitch fibers. As you increase your
pace, your VO2 max also increases, leading to recruitment of faster fibers, increased nervous- and
energy-system fatigue, and longer post-run recovery.
My own watchless running began in my mid-40s. I’d been doing the
same recovery run for years, and my time had gradually slipped from 45
minutes to 50 minutes. It was depressing. I decided, Enough! and left the
watch at home the next time I did that run. At the end of the run, my son
Sean admitted he’d timed me. “You ran 62 minutes,” he said. Turned out,
I’d been running too fast all along. After that day, I stopped wearing a
watch for distance runs. I slowed my pace. Recovered better. Was stronger
on hard days. And saw my race times drop.
Distance runs will make up the bulk of your training volume. And long-
term improvement is largely dictated by the accumulation of these runs. But
the emphasis is on “long-term.” We’re talking months and years, not days
and weeks.
In the meantime, running distance faster than necessary won’t shortcut
the process or earn you a faster 5K. Instead, it will leave you tired, heavy-
legged, unprepared for the next day’s workout, and slower on race day.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 29 ---
KEY
5
Split Tempo Runs into Repetitions
Tempo is quite possibly the most misunderstood workout in running.
And for good reason: Tempo runs can be completed at three different
paces, and each of these paces requires a different duration for the workout
to be effective. So step one in designing a tempo workout is understanding
what paces are considered “tempo”:
Marathon pace: a pace you could maintain for a marathon, roughly
40–60 seconds slower than 5K pace; workout calls for 25–30 minutes at
this pace
Half-marathon pace: a pace you could maintain for a half-marathon,
roughly 25–40 seconds slower than 5K pace; workout calls for 20–25
minutes at this pace
60-minute pace: a pace you could maintain for 60 minutes, roughly
15–25 seconds slower than 5K pace; workout calls for 15–20 minutes at
this pace
And then there’s the (incorrect) pace at which many runners do their
tempo workout: all out.
Let’s start with this last approach—tempo run as de facto time trial.
Simply put, don’t do it. As far as your body is concerned, it’s a race, and a
race requires a taper beforehand and a few recovery days afterward. It’s too
hard an effort for a workout.
--- PAGE 30 ---
Next, let’s look at the three legitimate tempo paces. All actively engage
100 percent of your available slow-twitch muscle fibers and about 50
percent of available intermediate fibers (more for 60-minute pace, less for
marathon pace), stimulating the following adaptations:
Increased mitochondria for recruited slow-twitch and intermediate
fibers
Increased capillaries for recruited fibers—increasing their supply of
nutrients and oxygen
Improved ability to utilize and clear lactate (a carbohydrate energy
source) from within recruited muscle fibers
Improved ability to buffer and export acidic hydrogen ions from
recruited fibers, as well as to manage other fatigue-inducing by-
products of anaerobic energy production
Improved ability to burn fat as a fuel source
So which pace should you choose for your tempo runs? You’ll develop
better running efficiency for the 5K at paces that are closer to 5K goal race
pace, so go with the half-marathon and 60-minute tempo paces.
Which brings us to the key point. Even though tempo should be run at
what Olympic coach and author Jack Daniels has defined as “comfortably
hard,” it’s still a workout that results in significant muscular, connective
tissue, and nervous-system fatigue. Mistakes in pace judgment (e.g., you
choose a 60-minute pace that is faster than what your body is ready to run
that day) can lead to system overload. Consequently, it makes sense to
break your tempo runs into 5-minute or 10-minute repetitions, with a 2–3-
minute jogging recovery interval. Not only does your nervous system get a
break, you also have time during the recovery interval to reassess your
pace. If you’re going too fast (if your effort level exceeds what you could
maintain for the targeted half-marathon or 60-minute pace, or if you start
breathing as hard as you would during 5K/10K-pace repetitions or a race),
then you can slow down during the next repetition.
--- PAGE 31 ---
Most 5K runners choose to run tempo repeats at 60-min. pace or half-marathon pace. Depending on
fitness level, you can break your tempo workout into multiple reps, separated by brief jogging
recovery intervals.
Note: Advanced includes two options.
Most 5K runners should schedule 2–3 tempo workouts per month.
While elite marathoners set aside 15–20 percent of their training for tempo,
you’ll require a wider range of pace work to generate the fitness arsenal
required for a 5K race—it’s unlikely you’ll have enough available time or
energy to perform that much tempo.
“We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act, but a
habit.”
—Will Durant, American historian, writer, and philosopher
--- PAGE 32 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 33 ---
KEY
6
Include VO2max Workouts
The 5K burns a lot of oxygen.
Improving your 5K performance will require burning even more
oxygen. That’s because the 5K is 90–95 percent fueled by aerobic energy—
energy created within muscle fibers using carbohydrates, fats, and oxygen.
When your aerobic energy supply is low, you run slowly. If you can
increase the supply, you run faster. You should already have the
carbohydrates (see Key 16) and fats you need to produce more aerobic
energy. It’s oxygen that’s deficient. Increase both the oxygen supply and
your ability to utilize that supply, and you increase energy production.
Increase energy production—and fast 5K, here you come.
You don’t increase your oxygen supply by breathing in more air. You
increase it by improving transportation of oxygen to your muscle fibers.
While your heart and major blood vessels handle bulk transport of oxygen
throughout your body, it’s the very smallest blood vessels, your capillaries,
that deliver oxygen to muscle fibers themselves. Capillaries are so small
that red blood cells, which carry oxygen, pass through them in single file.
The only way to route more oxygen to a muscle fiber is to create more
capillaries. Once delivered, oxygen is used by each muscle fiber’s
mitochondrial power plants to create energy. The only way to increase
energy production is to create more and bigger mitochondria. Bottom line:
You need to create more capillaries and bigger, more numerous
mitochondria. Otherwise, breathing in more oxygen is like pumping 20
gallons of gas into your car’s 10-gallon tank—lots of spillage, but no
increase in available fuel.
--- PAGE 34 ---
Distance runs and tempo workouts are effective for increasing the
number of capillaries and mitochondria in slow-twitch fibers and some
intermediate fibers. But to maximize this adaptation and to extend it to all
your intermediate fibers—the key to your 5K performance, because
intermediate fibers produce more force and contract more quickly than
slow-twitch fibers—you’ll need to schedule VO2max workouts. Your
VO2max is defined as the maximum amount of oxygen that your body can
consume in one minute. Again, it’s not the amount of oxygen you can
breathe into your lungs that counts. It’s the amount of oxygen that your
mitochondria consume to create energy.
For a VO2max workout to be effective (i.e., to stimulate the creation of
lots of capillaries and mitochondria), you’ll need to run repetitions at a
minimum of 90 percent of your current VO2max. Less won’t stimulate the
improvement you’re after; conversely, working at greater than VO2max
will leave you more fatigued without offering an increased benefit. For this
reason, runners looking to increase VO2max train at one of three paces:
10K pace: approximately 90 percent VO2max
5K pace: approximately 95 percent VO2max
3K pace: approximately 100 percent VO2max
For most runners, 5K pace is the best training option. At 5K pace, you
get close to maximum benefit without risking the excessive fatigue that can
accompany 3K pace, and you’re also assured of staying above the 90
percent threshold—a concern for slower runners who use a smaller
percentage of VO2max at 10K pace. On the other hand, super-fit runners
who race often—and for whom rep sessions at 5K pace might be too intense
an additional workload—often fare better at 10K pace. (Note: If you don’t
know your 3K, 5K, or 10K pace, see the Training Paces table on p. 128 for
help estimating your pace using your times at race distances from 1500
meters to the half-marathon.)
--- PAGE 35 ---
This sample progression of VO2max workouts is best performed during the base-training period.
Note that the first workouts include reps that won’t produce minutes at VO2max but are essential for
building muscle and connective tissue strength. Schedule one VO2max workout per week or
alternate this progression of VO2max workouts with tempo runs on a weekly basis.
*Pick a combination of reps (# of reps and length of reps) that results in 12–16 min. at VO2max;
remember that the first 2 min. of any rep don’t count toward this total.
VO2max reps are best measured in minutes, not distance (e.g., a mile
repeat), because it’s the amount of time at near-VO2max that counts, not the
distance you travel at that effort. For this reason, it’s a good idea to do these
reps on roads or trails, where you’ll find less temptation to compete against
yourself—to see if you can go farther by running faster on successive reps
—as sometimes happens on a track or measured course.
“If you stay in your comfort zone, you’re not going to do anything special.”
—Deena Kastor, Olympian and multiple American record holder
VO2max repetitions should last a minimum of two minutes (it takes
approximately two minutes of running for your aerobic system to reach
VO2max), with a maximum length of 6 minutes (4–5 minutes at 3K pace).
The recovery interval should be 2–4 minutes.
An exception to the minimum-2-minute repetition rule occurs when
shorter reps are combined with 30–40 seconds of recovery. Since VO2max
remains high for 30–40 seconds post-repetition, runners who begin their
--- PAGE 36 ---
next rep in that time frame remain at an effective training level—that said,
the reps themselves must be short (e.g., 200–400 meters) to avoid excessive
fatigue. We’ll look at workouts like this in Key 12.
A typical once-per-week progression of VO2max workouts is illustrated
in the VO2max Workouts Progression table. While some runners will opt to
perform this progression in the minimum 6–7 weeks required, with a goal
of racing in the near future, other runners will choose to extend their base-
training period for 2–3 months before their first important race. The latter
group of runners often alternates VO2max and tempo workouts—either on
a weekly basis or with tempo replacing VO2max training every third or
fourth week—as they build more slowly, targeting a larger overall gain in
fitness.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 37 ---
KEY
7
Schedule Short Repetitions/Intervals
Running short, fast repetitions (reps) strengthens your heart, sharpens your
anaerobic system, and improves leg speed.
Short reps strengthen your heart by increasing your “stroke volume,”
the amount of blood your heart pumps with each beat. The more blood per
beat, the more oxygen you send by way of your bloodstream to your
muscles.
Short repetition training, better known as “interval training,” dates to
the 1930s, when German coach Woldemar Gerschler, influenced by
cardiologist Hans Reindell, created the workout. He had athletes run short,
intense reps of 100 to 400 meters—however long it took to raise their heart
rates to 180 beats per minute. At that point, his athletes immediately slowed
to a walk or jog (the recovery “interval”). When their heart rates dropped to
120 beats per minute, they’d start the next rep. If a runner’s heart rate took
longer than 90 seconds to slow to 120 beats, the workout was finished.
Contrary to what you might think, the workout stimulus occurs during
the recovery interval, not the rep. During the recovery interval, returning
blood creates a momentary increase in pressure within your heart. This
happens because your heart rate (a measure of the blood being pumped
away from your heart) drops more quickly than the rate at which previously
pumped blood returns to your heart—this stretches your heart chambers,
which adapt by increasing in size, which in turn leads to an increase in
stroke volume.
--- PAGE 38 ---
“It’s true that speed kills. In distance running, it kills anyone who does not
have it.”
—Brooks Johnson, USA Olympic coach
Short reps also build your anaerobic system—the system that provides
most of your energy for the first 150–250 meters of a 5K race. When you
accelerate off the start line, your energy requirements increase immediately.
Your aerobic system can’t increase its energy output as quickly. That’s
because you can’t increase aerobic energy production until your lungs,
heart, and bloodstream deliver a larger supply of oxygen to your muscles, a
process that takes 30–40 seconds. Until then, you rely on anaerobic energy
(energy produced within your muscles without using oxygen) to pick up the
energy slack. Short reps combined with longer recovery intervals allow you
to practice this 30–40-second anaerobic energy burn multiple times (note
that short recovery intervals are counterproductive, as they allow your
aerobic energy system to remain powered up, negating the need for
increased anaerobic energy). You get better at producing anaerobic energy,
and you get better at buffering the fatigue-producing by-products that
accompany it. You’ll be able to charge off the start line without fear of
running short of energy in the first quarter-mile or staggering to the mile
mark when the by-products of un-buffered anaerobic energy production
begin shutting down your muscles.
--- PAGE 39 ---
Short reps can be performed at 1500/mile effort or 3K effort. If the listed recovery interval isn’t
enough to significantly lower your heart rate between reps, it’s OK to lengthen your recovery (up to a
maximum of 90 sec.). The workout can be performed on roads, trails, grass, or track.
Another benefit is that short reps done at 1500-to-3K pace (see the
Training Paces table on p. 128 to get paces; or just guesstimate) recruit 100
percent of your available intermediate muscle fibers and about 80 percent of
your fast-twitch fibers. This allows you to strengthen fibers that don’t get
used during either distance runs or longer repetitions, but which will be
recruited in a 5K race. The result is improved leg speed when you need it
most in your 5K race.
For maximum 5K racing benefit, you should include 2–3 sessions of
short reps per month for a minimum total of 4–5 sessions. Note that short
hill reps of 30–60 seconds create a similar stimulus and adaptation, so they
can be substituted for traditional interval training. (See more about hill
repeats in Key 9.)
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 40 ---
KEY
8
Join the Over-the-Hill Gang
To shine as a 5K runner, you’ll need to take to the hills.
If you live in an area with the right terrain, you can add hills to your
runs two to three times per month. Your weekly long run is a good choice
for hills, since it’s bookended by easier training days (adding hills will
definitely increase the intensity of distance runs). If you don’t have a good
hill in your area, consider making occasional hill dates with a treadmill.
Hills have been a staple in the training diets of top distance runners for
decades. In the 1960s, famed New Zealand coach Arthur Lydiard used hill
training to propel his country’s distance runners to international acclaim. In
the ’70s and ’80s, it was Lord Sebastian Coe, two-time Olympic champion
at 1500 meters, who relied on hills for the strength that netted him 11
indoor and outdoor world records. And the slopes of the Great Rift Valley
have lifted Kenyans to domination of the world distance scene for decades.
These runners included hills in their distance runs for good reason:
Hills increase the volume of muscle fibers you recruit while running.
By working more muscle fibers, hill running improves nervous-
system coordination between muscle-fiber types, not to mention the
muscle groups (e.g., hamstrings and quadriceps) they represent.
Long hill runs challenge the energy-producing capacity of all fiber
types.
Running uphill creates ankle flexibility, improving your stride.
Hill running increases Achilles tendon stiffness, which improves
“elastic recoil” (see Key 15 for an explanation of this important
--- PAGE 41 ---
running component).
Hill training stimulates adaptations similar to resistance training, and
these adaptations improve your ability to produce force.
While distance runs over flat terrain recruit mostly slow-twitch fibers,
hill runs draw upon a large percentage of intermediate fibers (and some
fast-twitch fibers) to provide the force required to battle gravity. You put
more muscle fibers into action and then work those fibers strenuously. The
result? Stronger intermediate and fast-twitch muscle fibers.
A comparison of hill runs and flat runs shows the increased benefits of the former.
Note: The elevated intensity that accompanies hill runs makes it advisable to treat them like “hard”
workouts, with easy days preceding and following them.
Using all these muscle fibers demands increased input from your
nervous system. Your nervous system adapts by learning more efficient
routes (neural pathways) for communicating commands to muscles and
muscle fibers. You develop a more efficient stride that carries over to all
your running—uphill, downhill, flat, slow, and fast.
--- PAGE 42 ---
Finally, working all your muscle-fiber types for the prolonged period of
time it takes to crest a hill demands a large, sustained energy supply. Your
muscles adapt with improvements to both aerobic and anaerobic energy-
producing capability. This increased energy supply will help you to sustain
a faster pace during your 5K race.
Start by including 5–10 minutes of uphill running in a distance run
every 2–3 weeks, then build up to 15–25 minutes of uphill during those
runs. And don’t race the hills; just run them. (To learn how to structure a
super effective hill-rep workout, see Key 9.)
Hills have always been one of the running world’s worst-kept training
secrets. Almost all elite runners include them. You should, too.
“The fight is won or lost far away from witnesses—behind the lines, in the
gym, and out there on the road, long before I dance under those lights.”
—Muhammad Ali, three-time heavyweight boxing champion of the world
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 43 ---
KEY
9
Schedule Hill Repeats
“Some people train knowing they’re not working as hard as other people. I
can’t fathom how they think.”
—Alberto Salazar, three-time New York Marathon champion
Now that we’ve discussed the benefits of both repetitions and hills, let’s
combine them to create a super-effective 5K workout: hill repeats. Hill
repeats include reps that last between 30 seconds and 2 minutes, with rest
intervals (jogging and walking) that are double or triple the length, in time,
of the reps.
While workouts like distance and tempo runs, VO2max reps, and long
hill runs trigger adaptations in the number and size of mitochondria in your
muscle fibers (i.e., you develop bigger, more numerous mitochondria,
thereby increasing aerobic energy–producing potential), intense workouts
such as hill repeats turbocharge those mitochondria, significantly increasing
their output of aerobic energy. If the workouts already discussed in this
book are like outfitting your home with radiant LED security lights, then
hill reps are the switch that turns those lights on.
Hill repeats also improve your ability to produce force quickly. That’s
important because the prime directive each time your foot lands during a
stride is to generate enough force to get back into the air. The quicker you
do that, the quicker you start your next stride. Generating force is a two-step
process. First, you accelerate your foot downward, creating force when your
foot collides with the ground. Second, your muscles generate additional
--- PAGE 44 ---
force while your foot is on the ground. Because hill repeats shorten the
distance your foot travels downward (lessening collision force) and require
extra overall force generation to fight gravity, they improve your ability to
produce muscular force on the ground. Back on level terrain, the result is a
quicker cadence (i.e., more steps per minute) and increased stride length. In
other words, you get faster.
Hill repeats also stimulate other training adaptations:
They significantly strengthen all muscle-fiber types.
They rewire your nervous system to recruit all fiber types
simultaneously.
They increase your heart’s stroke volume.
You’ll need to find a hill that’s challenging, but not so steep that you
can’t maintain a good stride. You don’t run hill reps by pace. Instead, you
target an effort that is slightly more intense than what you’d expect to exert
during a 5K race (e.g., 1500–3K effort). Your goal is to finish all reps with a
little gas left in the tank—that is, you could probably run one more rep if
you had to.
After each rep, turn around and head back down the hill to your start
line. Walk for the first 10–15 seconds of your recovery interval, and then
jog the rest of the way down. If you reach your start line with time
remaining in your recovery interval, do a short walk. For longer recovery
intervals, it’s okay to stand for 15–30 seconds at the start line after your
short walk.
Remember not to turn your hill repeats into a distance run. You need a
full recovery, so avoid jogging continuously from the end of one rep until
the start of the next. Walk, jog, walk, stand, recover.
--- PAGE 45 ---
This is a typical progression of hill repeat workouts. Do no more than one session per week. It’s OK
to skip weeks between sessions.
Hill repeats require intense effort, so one session during a training week
is plenty, and no more than two to three sessions per month. The Workout
Progression for Hill Repeats table maps out a typical progression of hill-
repeat workouts. This progression works even if you skip a week or two
between hill rep sessions.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 46 ---
KEY
10
Lengthen Your Long Run
“The long run is what puts the tiger in the cat.”
—Bill Squires, world-famous distance-running coach
Once a week, even 5K runners need to go long. It’s a common
misconception that the length of this long run should be directly
proportional to the length of your goal race—that long runs of 90 minutes
or more should be left to marathoners. Poppycock. The length of your long
run should be based on the physiological demands of your target race. Since
90–95 percent of your 5K-race energy is produced aerobically, you’ll want
to develop your aerobic system as much as possible. A true long run is a big
part of that.
The regular-length distance runs you perform during the week can be
counted on to improve aerobic energy production in 70–80 percent of your
slow-twitch muscle fibers. But to extend this adaptation to 100 percent of
your slow-twitch fibers, as well as a significant percentage of your
intermediate fibers, you’ll need to schedule one run per week that takes you
a little bit farther. Approximately 90 minutes into a distance run, your slow-
twitch fibers begin to run out of muscle glycogen (each one of your muscle
fibers has its own unique supply of this energy-producing carbohydrate).
This forces other slow-twitch fibers—ones not previously recruited—to
take over for them. Run long enough, and intermediate fibers are activated,
too.
--- PAGE 47 ---
Draining the gas tanks of some fibers while activating other fibers
triggers several beneficial adaptations:
Creates new capillaries for all recruited muscle fibers as your body
struggles to maintain supply lines over a long period of time
Increases glycogen storage capacity in all affected muscle fibers—
your muscle fiber’s carbohydrate fuel tanks can double in size
Improves aerobic energy production in all recruited fibers
Improves ability to burn fat as an energy source (you won’t burn
much fat during a 5K, but burning fat more efficiently spares
glycogen during both normal training and your race-day warm-up)
Increases supply of aerobic enzymes (these enzymes facilitate aerobic
energy production)
Improves nervous-system control of recruited fibers, leading to a
more efficient stride
Strengthens recruited muscle fibers and connective tissue
By depleting your glycogen stores significantly during your long run, you help trigger an adaptation
that leads to greater glycogen storage in the future.
Of course, the 5K isn’t the marathon, so you won’t need runs that
stretch to 20 miles or more. That would be a misuse of your running body’s
precious capacity to recover and rebuild. But runs that last 90–120 minutes
--- PAGE 48 ---
will go a long way to ensuring you develop the aerobic energy-producing
capacity required for a faster 5K.
Two rules of thumb to help you plan your long runs:
1 Your long run should account for 15–25 percent of your week’s total
volume.
2 Your long run should not exceed 150 percent of the length of your
regular distance runs, although this rule can be broken for low-
mileage runners or those who train less than 5 days per week.
Bottom line: Run long and prosper.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 49 ---
KEY
11
Try Downhill Running
Nothing strengthens your quadriceps for running more effectively than
downhill strides or downhill tempo.
Nothing.
These workouts require you to run downhill at an accelerated pace,
thereby increasing the intensity of eccentric muscle contractions associated
with running.
An eccentric muscle contraction occurs when a muscle both contracts
and stretches at the same time. An eccentric contraction of your quadriceps
occurs every time your foot touches down during a running stride. Your
front thigh contracts to brake and support you, but it simultaneously
stretches to allow your knee to bend. In contrast, a concentric contraction
occurs when a muscle contracts and shortens (e.g., when you show off your
guns by flexing your biceps, bunching the shortened muscle into a ball).
It’s important to include eccentric training in your program for two
reasons:
1 Eccentric contractions produce substantially more force than
concentric contractions, increasing the training load for the muscle
fibers that are activated.
2 Eccentric contractions are associated with post-workout muscle
soreness (called DOMS, or delayed onset muscle soreness), so you’ll
want to immunize your legs against that possibility.
--- PAGE 50 ---
While there are several theories for why eccentric contractions produce
more force than concentric ones, the important takeaway for runners is that
this increased force is produced while recruiting fewer muscle fibers. That’s
right: You generate more force using less muscle. By running downhill, you
increase the eccentric load even more. You give your legs a workout that
can’t be matched on flat ground. Your leg muscles, especially your
quadriceps, respond by getting stronger. A lot stronger. While other
runners’ legs might be sore the day after a hard speed workout or a race,
yours will feel fresh and bouncy.
Downhill running also strengthens both connective tissue and your
nervous system’s control of muscle contractions, improving what’s known
as “leg stiffness.” Leg stiffness doesn’t refer to post-workout muscle
stiffness or a lack of flexibility. Instead, it’s a measure of your leg’s
resistance to bending at the ankles, knees, and hips when your foot touches
the ground. Less bending means less energy loss, less time spent on the
ground, and a more efficient stride. Think of bouncing a super ball (leg
stiffness) versus a beach ball (untrained legs).
Begin your downhill training with tempo-effort reps, then increase both number of reps and intensity
over the next sessions. If desired, advance to a single downhill tempo rep, with a jog recovery.
Note: No more than one session per week.
Additionally, you’ll improve your knee lift, stride length, and cadence
(the number of steps you take per minute).
As a bonus, eccentric training requires less energy and less nervous
system input than a similarly intense workout on flat ground. After initial
--- PAGE 51 ---
muscle strengthening, you’ll require less recovery after a session of
downhill running than following a hard track workout.
So we’re clear, you won’t get these benefits from the normal downhill
running you’ll log during distance runs. Instead, you’ll have to schedule
sessions of more intense downhill training (no more than one session per
week):
Downhill strides: Start with a set of 4–6 strides, 15–30 seconds each, at
about 80–85 percent maximum effort (tempo effort) on a semi-steep
hill. Walk back to the start line for recovery. Add two strides per
workout, up to a maximum of 10.
Downhill tempo: After you’ve completed at least three weeks of
downhill strides, try a continuous downhill tempo run. Start with 5
minutes of tempo, then build over successive workouts to 10–12
minutes. If you don’t have a long hill in your area, you can substitute
longer downhill reps, still at tempo effort (don’t run harder than tempo
effort for reps over 30 seconds).
One of the best things about downhill running is that the training sticks
with you. Once you’ve gotten the adaptation you’re after, you’ll only have
to schedule downhill running once a month to retain its benefits.
A note of warning: Masters runners should exercise caution when
performing this workout, as hamstring strains can occur in older runners
during intense downhill running. For these runners, a more conservative
pace and less aggressive week-to-week progression is advised. Runners
with a history of hamstring issues should skip this workout altogether.
“Toenails are overrated.”
—Unknown runner
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 52 ---
KEY
12
Perform Goal-Pace Repetitions at the
Right Time
Lots of 5K runners perform track repetitions (e.g., 400-meter reps) at their
goal 5K pace.
Most of these same 5K runners do their goal-pace reps too early in their
training schedule. Instead of getting a race benefit, they risk sabotaging
their 5K programs.
Training at goal pace before you’ve achieved goal-pace fitness
overtaxes your nervous system, muscles, connective tissue, and energy
systems. While you may experience a short-lived bump in fitness, the
excessive load this training places on your body can lead to fatigue, injury,
illness, or overtraining syndrome (see Key 19). At best, you simply fail to
improve.
While you’re in the fitness-building phase of running, your 5K-effort
repetitions should be based on current fitness. Current fitness means the
pace you could run for 5K that day. During this phase of training, you’re
not running repetitions to practice pace; you’re using pace as a way to target
the specific percentage of VO2max represented by that pace. That allows
you to control which muscle-fiber types and energy systems you train.
This guideline changes, however, as race day approaches and you begin
to acquire goal fitness. Now, it’s time to fine-tune your 5K engine. Your
nervous system needs to become efficient at orchestrating your goal-pace
stride, and you want to develop conscious recognition of various sensations
at goal pace. By becoming familiar with the visual and audible cues
--- PAGE 53 ---
associated with goal pace (such as the visual of whizzing past trees, houses,
and parked cars on the road, or the audible cue of your shoes’ cadence on
the ground), you’ll find it easier to recognize and implement that pace
during an actual race. This will help you resist both an adrenaline-fueled
sprint off the start (see Key 24) and the impulse to match the pace of
competitors who are running faster than you want to go.
You’ll want your first goal-pace workout to include shorter reps and
plenty of rest. These shorter reps help your nervous system lock onto the
pace. For your next goal-pace workouts, you’ll lengthen the reps, cutting
down the recovery interval for reps of 400 meters or less (these latter
workouts are referenced in Key 6 on VO2max, and they provide a huge
VO2max stimulus). These workouts both prepare your nervous system for
goal pace and build aerobic strength.
The Goal-Pace Repetitions Progression table provides a template for a
workout-to-workout progression. Or you can create your own repetition
workouts. Just be sure to limit individual reps to a maximum of 1600
meters-per-rep (or 1 mile on the roads or trail), allow a recovery interval of
50–100 percent of the length (in time) of your reps, and target a total
volume (for all reps combined) of between 4,800 and 8,000 meters.
“You learn to cut down trees by cutting them down.”
—Bateke proverb
--- PAGE 54 ---
This is a sample progression of goal-pace repetition workouts. You don’t have to perform this entire
progression. It’s OK to pick and choose workouts from this schedule (or create your own), although
you should include the first two workouts, as they are essential for teaching your nervous system goal
pace.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 55 ---
KEY
13
Run a 5K Tune-Up Race
No single workout will prepare you better for your goal race than a 5K
tune-up race.
That’s because you won’t be able to run a faster 5K until you run a
slower one.
Your brain won’t let you.
It’s your brain’s job to regulate the amount of exercise and effort your
body experiences. And, much like an overprotective parent, your brain is
afraid you’re going to hurt yourself. It believes that, if left to your own
devices, you’ll run so hard that your body temperature will soar, your heart
explode, and your muscles and connective tissue be damaged beyond repair.
According to the Central Governor Theory, proposed by South African
exercise scientist Dr. Timothy Noakes, “the brain regulates exercise
performance by continuously modifying the number of motor units [i.e., a
nerve and the muscle fibers it controls] that are recruited in the exercising
limbs.” In layman’s terms, this means that your brain shuts down muscle
fibers if it thinks you’re working too hard or running too low on fuel.
Furthermore, Noakes claims that the brain anticipates danger before it
arrives, acting preemptively to avoid it. It does this by creating a sensation
of fatigue and decreasing the force your muscles can generate.
The good news is that your brain can be taught that a 5K race isn’t
dangerous. You accomplish this by running an entire 5K race without
killing yourself. The brain responds by letting you run harder—and faster—
the next time out.
Tune-up races help your 5K goal race preparation in other ways, too:
--- PAGE 56 ---
You gain experience dealing with pre-race jitters.
You gain experience dealing with common pre-race activities such as
finding a parking spot, lining up for the Porta Potty, and securing
your timing chip to your shoe.
You practice adhering to a sensible race plan.
You learn to shrug off bad weather and other unforeseen obstacles.
You can run a tune-up 5K two weeks before your goal 5K and expect to
be recovered for your target race (it’s possible to race again in a week, as
long as you exclude hard workouts in the interim, but most runners benefit
from a short period of training between tune-up and goal races). If you can’t
find a tune-up 5K, it’s okay to pick a different race distance. Just make sure
that if you race longer than 5K (e.g., a 10K or half-marathon), you also allot
more recovery time before your goal race. How much time? See the Post-
Tune-Up Race Recovery Time chart.
“One must learn by doing the thing, for though you think you know it, you
have no certainty, until you try.”
—Sophocles
--- PAGE 57 ---
This chart suggests post-race recovery periods for races of various distances. The gray line represents
the number of days before runners should perform their first hard workout. The orange line suggests
the days runners should wait before a goal 5K race.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 58 ---
KEY
14
Schedule Injury-Prevention Exercises
& Resistance Training
You can’t run a fast 5K if you’re injured.
And chances are good that you’ll join the 50–80 percent of runners who
get injured every year if you neglect to set aside the time for two important
components of your training:
1 A 10–15-minute post-run injury-prevention routine that includes rope
stretching and easy body exercises, done 2–3 times per week
2 A 30–60-minute injury-prevention and resistance training routine,
done 1–2 times per week during base training
Unfortunately, injury-prevention exercises don’t double as injury-
reversal routines.
When it comes to injuries, there’s good news and bad news.
The bad news is that millions of runners each year fail to meet their
running goals—say, a fast 5K—because they get injured. They get sidelined
with runner’s knee, Achilles pain, plantar fasciitis, IT band syndrome, lower
back pain, or some other disabling injury. (See the Estimated Number of
Running Injuries Per Year for 5K Race Finishers chart for a breakdown of
the breakdowns.)
The good news is that you can reduce the likelihood of injury by
including prevention and resistance routines in your program. The better
news is that these routines also make you faster. A 2015 study published in
the International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance concluded
--- PAGE 59 ---
that only six weeks of resistance training “significantly improves 5-km
time.” And a 2013 study on masters marathoners found that six weeks of
resistance training improved running economy by 6 percent—running
economy measures the amount of oxygen you use to maintain a specific
pace; improved economy means you can use less oxygen (energy) to run
that pace, giving you the option of either running faster or maintaining the
pace for longer (at the same oxygen cost). Other adaptations you can expect
include:
Improved muscle balance
Increased stride length
Increased cadence (steps per minute)
Improved stability
Improved core strength
One final bit of advice about injury-prevention exercises: They aren’t
competitions. Don’t try to do them better than anyone has ever done them
before. They’re “checkmark” work—something you complete and then
check off your to-do list. If you work them too hard, you just might end up
suffering the injuries you’re trying to avoid.
“A clever person solves a problem. A wise person avoids it.”
—Anonymous
--- PAGE 60 ---
This is the estimated number of training and race injuries suffered by the 10 million 5K race finishers
in the United States each year, based on an injury rate of 65 percent (estimates range from 50–80
percent).
POST-RUN STRETCHING & EXERCISE ROUTINE
FREQUENCY: 2–3 times per week
WHEN: Post-workout (best after distance runs)
DURATION: Approximately 10–15 minutes
TOWEL TOE CURLS
Towel toe curls strengthen muscles in your feet and help keep plantar
fasciitis at bay. Plantar fasciitis is usually felt as pain in your heel or your
arch.
1 Sit barefoot in a chair, knees at a 90-degree angle, with toes resting
on the near edge of a towel spread flat on the floor. Put a shoe on the
--- PAGE 61 ---
far edge of the towel to provide resistance.
2 Keeping your heels on the floor, scrunch your toes to drag the towel
toward you. Bunch the towel beneath your arch (then behind your
heels when it builds up under your arch) until you’ve pulled in the
towel’s entire length.
Repeat twice.
LEG LIFTS
Leg lifts strengthen your abs and hip flexors, leading to core stability and
better knee lift.
1 Lie on your back with knees slightly bent. Link your hands behind
your head, lifting your head off the floor/ground.
2 Keeping your torso stable and maintaining the angle of your knees,
lift your legs to 45 degrees, then lower at a controlled (not slow) rate.
Just before your heels touch the ground, lift them again for the next
rep.
Start with one set of 15–20 reps, then build up over the course of
several weeks to one set of 40–50 reps.
ROPE HAMSTRING STRETCH
Stretching post-run can reduce stiffness for the next day’s run. But don’t
overstretch—your muscles aren’t taffy. You’re simply teaching your
nervous system that it’s safe to allow your hamstrings a little more range of
motion.
1 Lie on your back with one knee bent, foot flat on the floor. Hook a
rope (or belt, rolled towel, etc.) around the arch of your opposite foot,
with that leg extended (a small bend at the knee is OK).
2 Holding the ends of the rope in your hands, gently pull to raise the leg
until you reach your full range of motion (don’t overstretch!).
Simultaneously flex your quadriceps muscle, as this helps relax the
hamstring. Hold for 30 seconds, then lower the leg and repeat with
the opposite leg.
--- PAGE 62 ---
Do one rep for each leg.
ROPE CALF STRETCH
Like the rope hamstring stretch, this exercise will reduce calf stiffness for
your next run. It will also help stave off calf tightness, soreness, and strains
that sometimes follow intense workouts.
1 Lie on your back with one knee bent, foot flat on the floor. Hook a
rope (or belt, rolled towel, etc.) around the ball (front portion,
excluding toes) of your opposite foot, with that leg extended (a small
bend at the knee is OK).
2 While flexing your quadriceps, hold the ends of the rope in your
hands and gently pull to lift the leg and angle your foot toward your
shin (don’t pull too hard!). Hold for 30 seconds, then lower the leg
and repeat with the opposite leg.
Do one rep for each leg.
BONUS: THE DAYDREAMER
If lower back pain and tightness is a problem, add the daydreamer to your
routine. For this exercise, the key word is “relax.” Don’t do anything except
maintain the position.
1 Lie on your back with your arms out to your sides, hands at
approximately belly level, feet propped on a chair, with a 90-degree
bend at your knees and waist. Try to keep your feet from rolling
outward (they can rest against the chair back).
Take slow, deep breaths, relax, and hold for 5–10 minutes.
INJURY-PREVENTION & RESISTANCE TRAINING
ROUTINE
FREQUENCY: 1–2 times per week
--- PAGE 63 ---
WHEN: Post-workout (best after distance runs)
DURATION: Approximately 30–60 minutes
AIR SQUATS OR SQUATS (WITH WEIGHTS)
Runners without previous (and recent) resistance-training experience should
start with air squats, and then switch to squats (with weight) when their
fitness improves. Squats work your glutes, quadriceps, and hamstrings.
Runners will see better results from quarter-squats than half- or full-squats.
Our knees don’t bend much while running, so they don’t need to bend much
during squats.
AIR SQUATS
1 Stand with feet hip-width apart, toes pointed slightly out, with arms
straight out from your shoulders.
2 Bend your knees, pushing your hips back until the bend at the back of
your knees is between 135 degrees (quarter-squat) and 90 degrees
(half-squat). Simultaneously bring your arms forward, which helps
you maintain balance. Push upward to return to your start position.
Do 2–3 sets of 5–12 reps, depending on your fitness.
SQUATS
1 Stand straight with a barbell resting on your shoulders, hands wider
than shoulder-width on the bar (you can hold dumbbells in each hand,
if you prefer). Feet should be hip-width apart, toes pointing slightly
out.
2 Keep your feet flat, and move your hips back while bending your
knees. Lower your torso to a quarter-squat (or half-squat). Don’t arch
your back or perform the exercise too quickly. When you reach the
squat position, reverse the motion to return to your starting position.
Do 2–4 sets of 8–10 reps, depending on your fitness.
STEP-DOWNS
--- PAGE 64 ---
Step-downs work your quadriceps eccentrically, strengthening them for the
load they’ll encounter when your foot touches down during each stride.
Combined with squats, step-downs help stabilize your knee, important for
preventing runner’s knee.
1 Balance on one foot at the edge of a platform (bench, step, etc.), with
the ball of your foot extended over the platform’s edge. Hold onto a
nearby object for balance—this is about working the quadriceps, not
working balance. Suspend the opposite leg, knee straight, with your
foot in front of the platform.
2 Lower your hips by bending your support leg until the bend at the
back of your knee is at approximately 135 degrees (90 degrees is too
much). Your free foot will lower in front of the platform (as if you’re
stepping down). Rise back to your starting position and repeat.
Do 5–10 reps, depending upon your fitness, then repeat with your
other leg. Do 1–2 sets.
STEP-UPS
Step-ups target concentric contractions of your glutes, quadriceps, and
hamstrings. This exercise helps you generate the force required to take off
from the ground during each stride. It also puts your muscles through a
fuller range of motion than squats or step-downs.
1 Stand in front of a platform (bench, box, step, etc.). Place your right
foot on the platform with your left foot flat on the ground. Start with
the knee and hip of your raised leg at 90 degrees (bending more than
90 degrees is dangerous for your knees).
2 With your arms at your sides, push with your right leg to extend
(straighten) your hip and knee as you rise up on the platform.
Momentarily rest the ball of your left foot on the platform, and then
reverse your motion to return to your starting position.
Do 5–10 reps, depending upon your fitness, then repeat with your
other leg. Do 1–2 sets.
--- PAGE 65 ---
SINGLE-LEG DEADLIFTS
Single-leg deadlifts are one of two exercises that work the hamstrings
eccentrically. The hamstrings endure eccentric loads of up to 10 times body
weight during each stride, so it’s essential that you strengthen them. You
can do this exercise with or without weight. If you use weight, hold a
dumbbell in the opposite hand from your down leg.
1 With your feet hip-width apart, lift your right foot off the ground by
bending your knee. Bend your left knee slightly—don’t do this
exercise straight-legged. Use a chair or other object for balance.
2 Bend forward from your hips, reaching your right hand toward the
ground in front of your left foot. Simultaneously lift and extend your
right leg behind you. Maintain a slight bend in both knees. Now, in
one smooth motion, return to your starting position, contracting your
glutes and hamstrings. Use your hips as a hinge as you swing during
this exercise (think of the Drinking Bird toy).
Do 5–10 reps, depending upon your fitness, then repeat with your
other leg. Do 1–2 sets.
NORDIC CURLS
This is your second eccentric hamstring exercise. While single-leg deadlifts
focus on the upper hamstrings and glutes, Nordic curls target the lower
hamstrings.
1 Kneel, with elbows at your sides and hands held at chest height (as if
you’re about to do a push-up). You’ll need a partner or a sturdy object
to hold your ankles in place.
2 Bend forward from your knees, keeping hips and back straight,
slowly lowering yourself toward the ground. If you start to fall (i.e., if
your hamstrings can’t support your weight at some point in the
exercise), use your hands to slow your descent.
3 Use your arms to thrust yourself back up to your starting position.
Don’t attempt to return to your starting position by contracting your
hamstrings—that’s an injury begging to happen.
--- PAGE 66 ---
Do 1–2 sets of 2–10 reps (start with low reps, slowly build up to more
reps).
HEEL DIPS
Heel dips will give you stiffer and stronger Achilles tendons. This eccentric
exercise protects you against Achilles tendinitis, Achilles tendinosis,
Achilles bursitis, and Achilles insertional problems. Unlike other injury-
prevention exercises, heel dips can also double as a cure.
1 Balance on the balls of your feet on a platform (bench, box, step,
etc.). Your heels should extend over the edge of the platform. Use a
rail or other support for balance. As your fitness improves, hold a
dumbbell in the same side hand as your working leg.
2 Raise up on your toes, shift all your weight to your right foot, then
slowly lower your right heel through its full range of motion. Your
left foot can rest lightly on the platform, or you can raise it off the
platform as long as you maintain balance. Don’t do this exercise too
slowly, just slowly enough to control the motion.
3 Use both feet to quickly rise back to your start position. This isn’t
about working your calves (i.e., it’s not a calf-raise exercise). It’s
about eccentrically lowering your heel. If you don’t have a platform
—or pain prevents you from lowering your heel through its full range
of motion—it’s okay to do this exercise on level ground (or the floor).
Do all reps with one foot before switching to the other.
Start with 1–2 sets of 5 reps each foot, then build to 2–3 sets of 20
reps.
PLANKS
The plank is the best exercise for strengthening all the muscles of your core
—front, sides, and back—and it improves spinal stabilization.
1 Start in a modified push-up position: face down, resting on elbows
and toes, with your elbows directly beneath your shoulders, a 90-
--- PAGE 67 ---
degree bend at your elbows with your forearms extended forward.
Maintain a straight line from your head through your toes.
Hold the position, squeezing your glutes and tightening your
abdominals for 30–60 seconds. One repetition is enough.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 68 ---
KEY
15
Schedule Technique Drills &
Plyometrics
Technique drills and plyometrics are two types of training that most runners
ignore. That’s a mistake. Both make you faster and improve your running
economy. By combining them, you can get a leg up on (and a stride ahead
of) the competition.
Technique drills, also called form drills, isolate and exaggerate elements
of your stride. The goal is to strengthen the muscles involved in your stride,
increase your range of motion, fine-tune neuromuscular function, and
improve elastic recoil, which we’ll define in a minute.
Plyometrics, sometimes referred to as “jump training,” usually involves
dropping to the ground from an elevated height, absorbing the landing
force, and then springing back into the air. It triggers adaptations in
explosive strength, nervous-system reaction time, and running economy.
Combined into a single session—as either a standalone workout or the
prelude to a short repetitions or hill repeats workout—drills and plyometrics
will improve your stride rate, stride length, and stride efficiency, while
training two components of running that often go overlooked:
Elastic recoil: When your foot touches down with each stride, your
tendons, muscles, and ligaments stretch, absorbing the energy produced
by gravity and motion. Running mechanics expert and author Jay
Dicharry has described this as pulling back a slingshot. Once your foot
passes under your body, you release this energy, which helps catapult
you into your next stride. This is equivalent to releasing the slingshot.
--- PAGE 69 ---
Since your muscles don’t generate this energy (once you’re up to
speed), it’s “free.” And it accounts for about 50 percent of the energy
you’ll use to fuel each stride, with your Achilles tendon alone providing
up to 35 percent. When you improve elastic recoil with drills, you get a
longer, stronger, more energy-efficient stride.
Stretch-shortening cycle: In a stretch-shortening cycle, an eccentric
contraction of a muscle (the muscle contracts while it lengthens) is
followed immediately by a concentric contraction (the muscle contracts
as it shortens). The result is a significant increase in the force created by
the latter contraction. Stretch-shortening cycles occur multiple times
during each stride (e.g., your hamstrings experience a stretch-shortening
cycle just before your foot touches the ground, and your calves do the
same from the moment your foot lands until you start to take off again).
Plyometrics trains your body to better utilize these cycles. You’ll
generate greater force at an accelerated rate, which translates to less
time spent on the ground.
Research has shown that plyometrics is even more effective than
resistance training for improving running economy in endurance runners. If
you really want that fast 5K, however, you’ll do both.
The following training session utilizes drills that include a plyometric
component.
TECHNIQUE DRILLS (including plyometric component)
FREQUENCY: 1 time per week
WHEN: Before short repetitions or hill repeats, or as a standalone workout
bookended by distance run days
DURATION: 30–40 minutes (1 rep of each drill)
Note: Perform these in the order listed.
SKIPPING
--- PAGE 70 ---
Step forward with one foot, spring off it, land on it again, spring off it
again, then land on the other foot and repeat. Just like when you were a kid
in the schoolyard.
Do one rep of 20–60 meters (depending on fitness), then jog back to
the start line, immediately perform a stride (at 85–90 percent
maximum speed) for the same distance, then walk back to the start
line.
HIGH SKIPPING
When you skip this time, go for height and don’t worry about how far
forward each skip takes you. Spring high off your toes, then land on the
same foot before stepping forward into your next high skip.
Do one rep of 20–60 meters. Jog back. Stride. Walk back.
LONG SKIPPING (plyometric drill)
Skip again, this time going for distance, not height. Take off on one foot,
land on the same foot, then just step into the next skip (i.e., you spring far
during the skip, not so far when you’re switching feet).
Do one rep of 20–60 meters. Jog back. Stride. Walk back.
FLAT-FOOTED MARCHING
March forward, lifting knees toward your chest, while keeping your down
foot flat on the ground (i.e., don’t come up on the ball of your foot as you
march forward). Swing arms in sync with the marching (i.e., right leg and
left arm forward, then left leg and right arm forward). Land each marching
step flat-footed. Keep a piston-like motion as you drive your knees up and
down.
Do one rep of 20–60 meters. Jog back. Stride. Walk back.
HIGH KNEES
Stay on the balls of your feet as you move forward, driving one knee and
then the other toward your chest, simultaneously driving the ball of your
--- PAGE 71 ---
opposite foot into the ground—this latter action creates a spring-like effect
(elastic recoil) as your Achilles tendon absorbs and releases energy. Move
your legs as quickly as you can.
Do one rep of 20–60 meters. Jog back. Stride. Walk back.
BOUNDING (plyometric drill)
This is a great exercise for both elastic recoil and developing strong stretch-
shortening cycles. Drive forward off the ball of one foot, trying for a
combination of distance and height, hover in the air, then land on your
opposite foot, quickly absorb the landing force, and drive forward off that
foot.
Alternate legs with each bound, for 20–60 meters. Jog back. Stride.
Walk back.
QUICK FEET
Quickly lift one foot and move it forward 1–3 inches. Repeat with the other
foot.
Move your feet as quickly as you can, inching forward until you’ve
covered 20–30 meters. Walk forward an additional 20 meters. Jog
back. Stride. Walk back.
QUICK HOPS (plyometric drill)
Like bounding, this is a great drill for both elastic recoil and stretch-
shortening cycles. Keep feet together as you spring forward with short hops.
The emphasis is on springing forward, not up.
Cover 20–30 meters. Walk forward an additional 20 meters. Jog back.
Stride. Walk back.
BUTT KICKS
Run tall, staying on the balls of your feet. You’ll keep your thighs mostly
perpendicular to the ground while kicking your heels back, attempting to
--- PAGE 72 ---
touch your butt (it’s okay if you come up short). Work arms in a running
motion. Don’t strain during this drill.
Do one rep of 20–60 meters. Jog back. Stride. Walk back.
“The foot feels the foot when it feels the ground.”
—Ernest Wood, English yogi, theosophist, and author
--- PAGE 73 ---
Resistance training (RT) and plyometrics improve performance by improving running economy. Find
a time close to your current 5K time in Column A. Columns B and C offer a range of the times you
can expect to run after 8–12 weeks of either resistance training or resistance training plus
plyometrics.
Note: Improved times are given in a range, as some athletes respond better than others. Also, note
that athletes who already have a well-rounded program won’t see as much improvement.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 74 ---
PART
TWO
LIFESTYLE, DIET & GEAR
KEYS
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 75 ---
KEY
16
Eat a Runner’s Diet
The first rule for planning your runner’s diet is simple: Make sure you get
enough of everything you need. That means enough carbohydrates, enough
fat, and enough protein.
The 5K race is a high-intensity endurance event, and both your training
and racing will need to be powered by plentiful, quality fuel.
Your diet starts with carbohydrates. Carbohydrates are the fuel that
drives 5K performance. In fact, carbs (stored in your muscles and liver as
glycogen) provide between 75–90 percent of the fuel you’ll use to produce
energy during your 5K race.
Your starting glycogen level also helps determine the fatigue you’ll feel
during training and racing. When your initial glycogen levels are low, your
brain responds by limiting your ability to exercise intensely. When they’re
high, there are no such restrictions. A hard workout will reduce your muscle
glycogen levels by 50–85 percent (see Total Muscle Glycogen Stores, Key
10). It will reduce your liver glycogen stores, which fuel your nervous
system, even more. So it’s imperative that you include lots of carbs in your
daily diet. Studies indicate that it takes a minimum of 22 hours to restock
glycogen, but you can jump-start the process by consuming about 50 grams
(200 calories) of carbs right after your workout, when your body stores
glycogen at an accelerated rate. After that, you’ll want to keep your carb
intake high, aiming for between 2.3 and 5.5 grams (i.e., 9.2 and 22 calories)
of carbohydrates per pound of body weight per day, depending on the
volume and intensity of your training. If you train more than once per day,
you’ll want at least one of those workouts to be low intensity (e.g., an easy-
--- PAGE 76 ---
paced, short distance run), as low-intensity exercise splits its fuel source
more evenly between carbs and fats. One thing is certain: If you skimp on
carbohydrates, you’ll limit your ability to train, and you’ll run slower
during your 5K race.
“Exercise is king. Nutrition is queen. Put them together and you’ve got a
kingdom.”
—Jack LaLanne, American fitness, exercise, and nutrition expert
Fat is your second source of energy, accounting for about 50 percent of
the calories you’ll burn during distance runs (and an even larger percentage
during your weekly long run, during which glycogen becomes scarce and
your body turns to this denser source of energy). While most of us already
possess an almost inexhaustible fat supply (love handles, anyone?), that
doesn’t mean you should minimize fat in your diet. Your body becomes
efficient at burning the types of fuel you consume. If you eat fat, you’ll be
better able to use fat during exercise. That translates to better training and
better performance. In fact, research has found a significant performance
improvement for runners whose diets included at least 30 percent fat. A
2008 study concluded that women who failed to meet the 30 percent
threshold were 250 percent more likely to get injured.
Last but not least, proteins are the building blocks for your cells and
hormones, and they’re essential to post-workout repair. “If you take a big
spike of protein before bed,” says exercise scientist and elite-level coach
Steve Magness, “you’ll get a huge spike in protein synthesis overnight—
when a bunch of muscle repair and recovery goes on.” Magness
recommends 30 grams of protein before bed, with up to five additional 15-
gram servings of protein throughout the day. As a 5K athlete, you’ll want a
protein intake of about 0.6 to 0.9 grams per pound of body weight per day.
--- PAGE 77 ---
Different training intensities burn different combinations of carbs and fat. While walking is mostly
fueled by fat, a timed mile is fueled entirely by carbs. The 5K gets most of its energy from carbs, but
fat provides 10–25 percent (depending on your pace) of the calories you’ll burn.
Of course, you can’t live on macronutrients alone. You’ll also need to
meet the RDA requirements for vitamins and minerals (the RDA is
appropriate for 97–98 percent of healthy people). But don’t reach for the
supplement shelf. Instead, get your nutrition—your carbs, fats, proteins,
vitamins, and minerals—from real food, served in its original state (e.g.,
apples, not packaged fruit pies). When you eat enough of the right foods,
you give your body the raw materials it requires to build your best 5K body.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 78 ---
KEY
17
Run Light
The simplest way to ensure a faster 5K is to run light. Weight loss of even
five pounds can improve your 5K time by anywhere from 15 seconds to a
minute.
Of course, before you go on a diet, you need to determine how much
weight you need to lose—or if you need to lose weight at all. While healthy
weight loss will lead to better running performance, it does no good to diet
if you’re currently at a fit, thin, competition weight.
A quick way to gauge whether you’re a candidate for weight loss is to
calculate your BMI. Before doing that, understand that BMI is a limited
tool. According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), “BMI does not
distinguish between excess fat, muscle, or bone mass,” and it fails to
account for such factors as age, sex, and ethnicity. Muscular people and
athletes often have a high BMI without being unhealthy, and women tend to
have more total body fat than men with the same BMI. Still, it’s a simple
way to ballpark your weight-loss potential, with studies showing a strong
correlation to more direct measures of fat. To calculate BMI:
Multiply your weight (in pounds) by 703.
Divide the answer by your height in inches.
Divide again by your height in inches—this is your BMI.
If your multiplication and division skills are sketchy, there are plenty
of online calculators ready to do the work for you (just do an online
search for “BMI calculator”).
--- PAGE 79 ---
“Sweat is fat crying.”
—Anonymous
If your BMI is between 18.5 and 24.9, then congratulations—you’re
healthy. Below that is underweight. If you’re over that range, take a closer
look at your training diet.
If you believe you’re a candidate for healthy weight loss, you can look
forward to multiple benefits. Healthy weight loss increases VO2max,
reduces the impact forces absorbed by your muscles and connective tissue,
and improves running economy. You get fitter and faster.
That said, be aware that there are short-term drawbacks.
First, dieting lowers stored muscle glycogen levels. Lower muscle
glycogen levels reduce the effort you can maintain during both training and
racing. A 2001 study comparing two groups of cyclists—one who began a
time trial with elevated glycogen levels and one who began with non-
elevated levels—found that, although both groups started at the same pace,
the non-elevated group reduced speed within a minute, eventually finishing
6 percent slower than the glycogen-primed group (even as both groups had
almost identical levels of remaining glycogen at the time trial’s conclusion).
Next, losing weight too quickly—or when you’re already thin—can
result in the loss of lean muscle mass. Skeletal muscle powers your
movement, so reduced muscle-fiber size lessens the force available for that
movement. You risk negating any benefits derived from weight loss since
you simultaneously lose energy and power.
Finally, dieting can lower your metabolism by as much as 20 percent.
Your metabolism includes all the processes through which your body uses
food to create energy and maintain bodily functions. It accounts for the
majority of calories you use each day. You need to burn 3,500 calories more
than you consume to lose one pound, so a lowered metabolism can turn a
difficult diet goal into an impossible one.
--- PAGE 80 ---
This table illustrates how much time runners at various 5K times might improve with healthy weight
loss of 5 or 10 pounds, based on sample body weights.
Now for the good news.
As discussed in Key 16, your body replaces muscle glycogen at an
accelerated rate following training, so a carb infusion within 30 minutes
post-run helps stock your muscles with glycogen for the next workout, even
if you skimp on calories for the rest of the day.
Next, you can minimize the loss of lean muscle mass by following two
easy guidelines. One, target weight loss of no more than 1–2 pounds per
week. Two, perform high-intensity workouts (e.g., resistance training) that
reinforce previous strength gains.
Finally, there is a silver bullet solution for keeping your metabolism
high while you diet: exercise. Daily exercise will counteract most of the
effect that dieting has on metabolism.
Don’t panic if you don’t see weight loss right away. Eventually, faced
with a combination of calorie restriction and exercise, your metabolism will
blink, and you’ll be on your way to your weight-loss goal—and a faster 5K.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 81 ---
KEY
18
Wear Light Racing Flats
“The man who moves a mountain begins by carrying away small stones.”
—Adapted from a fable by Liè Zĭ, Taoist philosopher
Here’s a quick way to drop a minimum of 9–18 seconds from your 5K time
without having to train or diet: Race in a lighter pair of shoes.
Research has found that decreasing the weight of your racing shoes by
3.5 ounces per shoe will improve your 5K time by about 1 percent. The
average training shoe weighs 11–12 ounces, while most racing flats tip the
scales at about 6–8 ounces, with the lightest racing flats boasting a barely
there 4 ounces. By switching from training shoes to the lightest flats, a 20-
minute 5K runner can cut about 24 seconds from his or her time—12
seconds if he or she is already racing in 7–8-ounce flats. A 30-minute 5K
runner would gain 18–36 seconds. A 15-minute runner would improve 9–18
seconds.
And it gets better. By running your hard workouts—tempos, hills, drills,
and repetitions—in lighter shoes, you’ll improve the efficiency of your
stride at faster paces. Some runners mistakenly believe that doing hard
workouts in heavier shoes strengthens their legs, making race-day running
in lighter shoes much easier. Not so. Instead, doing hard workouts in heavy
shoes simply hardwires a stride that’s slightly different than the one you’ll
utilize with lighter shoes. The result is a less-efficient stride in the lighter
shoe come race day. If your aim is to race fast and efficiently in lighter
shoes, then practice running fast and efficiently in lighter shoes.
--- PAGE 82 ---
One caveat to this key: There’s a point at which lack of cushioning
outweighs the benefit of racing in a lighter flat—and research has shown
that barefoot running is the least efficient race choice of all. As a rule of
thumb, if your feet hurt due to lack of shoe, add a little more shoe.
Shoe Weight vs. Performance Improvement

--- PAGE 83 ---
These charts illustrate possible performance improvement for runners of different abilities, based
upon the weight of their racing flats. The 12-ounce weight represents the heavy side and assumes the
runner is racing in training shoes. The 3-ounce weight represents the light side, and shoes that weigh
less than 3 ounces offer no advantage (in fact, studies show there is a disadvantage to shoes lighter
than this, as well as to barefoot running).
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 84 ---
KEY
19
Sleep, Rest, Recover
This is a simple key that 5K runners can’t afford to ignore. You need to
recover from training to benefit from training.
That’s because you don’t get better at running while you’re training.
You get better while you’re recovering.
When you work out, you break down tissue (e.g., muscle, bone, and
tendon) and deplete resources like fuel, hormones, and neurotransmitters.
To improve, you’ll need to go through two phases of recovery:
Initial repair: You repair damaged tissue and replenish spent resources.
Supercompensation: Following initial repair, your body rebounds from
the workout by building even stronger tissues and increasing the volume
of your stored resources.
With proper recovery, you end up fitter than you were before training.
Without it, you might fail to complete initial recovery, and you won’t get
the benefit of supercompensation. You won’t get fitter. You won’t get faster.
If you’re lucky, you’ll merely end up disappointed with your lack of
improvement. If you’re unlucky, you’ll find yourself sick, sore, injured,
chronically fatigued, or, worst of all, overtrained. Overtraining syndrome
occurs when excessive fatigue and inadequate recovery sends you into a
physiological downward spiral—one that can only be arrested by full rest,
often extending for a period of two months or more.
Runners sometimes complain, “But I feel good! I’m ready to run hard
again.” Listen: Feeling good isn’t a green light to run hard. You’ll “feel
--- PAGE 85 ---
good” as soon as you’ve completed initial repairs, but that doesn’t mean
you’re ready to train hard again. It just means that you’re back to where you
started. Train hard right away, and you won’t improve. Continue to
bombard your body with hard workouts, and your body will eventually cry
uncle. You’ll wonder why all that hard training didn’t lead to your 5K goal
time, and the answer will be that you didn’t give all that hard training a
chance to work!
This chart offers guidelines for the number of days following a hard workout before runners should
perform another hard workout. Note that recovery varies depending on age and fitness.
To ensure that you recover fully and reap the benefits of
supercompensation, follow these guidelines:
1 Within the first 15–30 minutes post-workout, eat a snack that
includes at least 50 grams of carbohydrate and 20 grams of protein.
2 Get at least seven hours of sleep per night (elite 5K runners need
about nine).
--- PAGE 86 ---
3 Schedule at least 22 hours between workouts—if you’re running
twice per day, make sure one of the workouts qualifies as “easy,”
limiting both intensity and volume.
4 Schedule 2–3 days between hard workouts (e.g., repetitions, tempo,
hill repeats, etc.).
5 If you’re age 40+, consider scheduling 3–5 days between hard
workouts.
As a final guideline: Run your hard days hard and your easy days easy.
Turning easy runs into “medium” runs recruits more muscle fibers and
faster fiber types than required, leading to excess muscle damage and
nervous-system fatigue. And performing hard workouts at medium effort
leaves you unprepared for the more intense demands of a 5K race.
“Farm when it’s sunny, read when it rains.”
—Japanese saying
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 87 ---
KEY
20
Review Non-Running Activities &
Hobbies
“One cannot both feast and become rich.”
—Ashanti proverb
There are runners who plan their entire lives around running.
These runners never miss a workout. They sleep right. Eat right. Never
physically overexert themselves at work. They coordinate vacations with
races, like the Carlsbad 5000 or the Boston Marathon. And they never
participate in activities that put their muscles or connective tissue at risk—
no pick-up basketball games at the local YMCA, no bending over to
retrieve a quarter from the ground.
I know these runners well because I was one of them.
As a coach, however, I usually work with runners who, for lack of a
better description, have a life. They want to run a faster 5K, but that’s not
all they want. They want to play with their kids. Go on non-running
vacations. Help a friend move a refrigerator. Jog up stairs if they’re late for
a meeting. Coach a local Little League squad. Even bend over for that
quarter—or a nickel or a dime.
Which is great and healthy! But it calls to mind an old cliché: You can’t
have your cake and eat it, too.
I coached a runner via Skype who complained about a tender hamstring
after a race. Since I pride myself on injury-prevention, I pressed him on
--- PAGE 88 ---
anything he might have done pre- or post-race to put his hammy at risk. He
didn’t think there was anything—unless it was putting in a new living room
floor, mostly while on hands and knees, the previous week, or going
straight to a local river post-race to kayak for a few hours. Mystery of the
hamstring injury solved.
Often, runner-parents want to combine their own full training schedules
with regular “easy” workouts with their kids. Other runners are reluctant to
give up weekly, high-intensity CrossFit® or yoga sessions. Some runners
work construction or other manual labor jobs. Some enjoy crosstraining—
biking, swimming, hiking, sailing, skiing, or kayaking. Some have other
strenuous hobbies and activities that are important parts of their lives.
This chart estimates the negative effect of various activities on 5K training and racing. Note that
many of the activities with higher scores are safe when worked into your training program, with a
proper recovery period scheduled before your next hard running workout.
And these are all good things. But just because they’re good things
doesn’t mean they don’t count when it comes to balancing out the workload
your body can handle. You only have so much adaptive potential. If you run
--- PAGE 89 ---
five miles with your kids’ running club, that’s five miles of tissue damage
and about 500 calories of energy expenditure. A 30-minute session of high-
intensity weight training is a hard workout—you’ll need two days before
your next hard workout. A hard day of manual labor results in stiff,
inflamed muscles; you’ll have to postpone any hard workout you had
scheduled or make do with less intense training.
To run a great 5K, you don’t need to insulate yourself from life’s
experiences. But know that every activity has a cost. A full training
schedule for a fast 5K along with a full non-running schedule of hobbies
and activities can’t coexist. Something has to give. What that “something”
is will be determined by you. You’ll need to conduct an honest review of
your running goals and their importance to you. And then you’ll decide how
best to balance them with the rest of your life.
One of my favorite quotes comes from science fiction writer Philip K.
Dick: “Reality is that which, when you stop believing in it, doesn’t go
away.”
The reality is that your body can only adapt to a limited physical
workload each day. Overwhelm it, and you don’t get fitter. You break.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 90 ---
PART
THREE
RACE-DAY
KEYS
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 91 ---
KEY
21
Try a Mini-Taper
“In theory, there is no difference between theory and practice. In practice,
there is.”
—Jan L. A. van de Snepscheut, computer scientist and educator
“I felt great during my workout on Monday, but then I was totally flat for
my race on Saturday.”
It’s a familiar refrain from disappointed 5K racers. They completed their
distance runs. Did all their repetitions. Ran hills. Ate right. Slept right. Even
did a perfect taper the final week before their race, reducing overall training
volume by 40–60 percent.
So what went wrong?
What might have gone wrong was that a traditional taper didn’t work
for these runners. For some runners, the sudden interruption to their normal
training routine doesn’t lead to fresh, fit, and fast legs. Instead, it leaves
these runners stale, heavy-legged, and, in some cases, susceptible to colds
and allergy attacks.
The solution is a mini-taper. Rather than starting your taper 4–7 days
out from race day, limit it to the final 2–3 days—with one exception:
Eliminate the previous weekend’s long run, substituting a regular-length
distance run.
During your mini-taper, cut normal volume by 20–25 percent until the
day before the race, when you’ll limit yourself to 15–30 minutes of easy
running. On this final day, younger runners can add 3–4 race pace strides of
--- PAGE 92 ---
40–100 meters. Older runners should consider skipping the strides. While
the strides help keep younger legs fresh and ready to produce the force
required for racing, they can leave the nervous system of older runners
slightly fatigued—leading to the exact heavy-legged feeling these runners
are trying to avoid.
--- PAGE 93 ---
This table compares a non-taper, a traditional taper, and a mini-taper week. Runs are given in time
rather than distance.
Note: The mini-taper week is only an example and isn’t meant for use as a template.
*For 75-mile weeks, runners need to add extra runs (double workouts) during non-taper and mini-
taper weeks, with no extra runs for a traditional taper week.
With a reduced taper, you keep your regular training rhythm and still get
enough recovery to ensure full glycogen stores, a refreshed nervous system,
and repaired muscle fibers. You might not get the extra boost that
--- PAGE 94 ---
accompanies a full taper, but you won’t feel like someone superglued your
feet to the start line, either.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 95 ---
KEY
22
Beat the Jitters
“Make sure your worst enemy doesn’t live between your own two ears.”
—Laird Hamilton, American big-wave surfer
We all get nervous on race day. That’s expected.
“Any runner who denies having fears, nerves, or some other kind of
disposition,” said 1950s British Olympian Gordon Pirie, “is a bad athlete, or
a liar.”
But for some runners, race jitters (an irrational panic in the buildup to a
race) aren’t limited to race day. For some, jitters can infect the final weeks
before the race. They can lead to unforced errors that upend months of
smart training. What makes jitters especially destructive is that runners
don’t always recognize them, even when they’re shaking in their shoes.
Here then, are five common mistakes runners make due to the jitters—
along with practical advice for combating them.
1 Spontaneous injury: As race day approaches, you suddenly become
aware of some acute pain or injury. Your Achilles hurts. Or your back
is tight. Or you’ve got a pain in your hip that you’re certain must be a
stress fracture. Are you really injured? Yes, you are. Then again,
you’re always slightly injured. Hard training leads to minor aches and
pains. Normally, runners shrug these off—until race anxiety amplifies
them in our minds. Don’t worry. Once the race starts, you’ll forget all
about these phantom injuries.
--- PAGE 96 ---
2 Second-guessing syndrome: It’s the week of your race, and the
realization hits: “Everything I’ve done to prepare for this race is
wrong!” You decide you should have done more distance. Or speed.
Or tempo. Or drills. You wonder if you should do a crash course in
whatever’s lacking. Don’t. Instead, relax. There’s nothing you can do
in a week to get faster. At the same time, there’s a lot you can do to
sabotage your race. Run the race you have in you, then assess
afterward whether your training needs a tweak.
3 Workout warrior: The race is almost upon you, but you simply can’t
wait the few remaining days to test your fitness. The solution is clear:
Run an all-out time trial or a monster workout . . . No. Just no.
Testing your race readiness won’t improve your fitness, but it will
break down muscle, deplete muscle glycogen, and exhaust your
nervous system, leaving you with dead legs on race day. Don’t waste
your fitness on a workout.
4 Routine changes: Some runners change their routine in advance of a
race. They think more rest and less exertion will make them a faster
runner. So they skip chores. Avoid normal outings. Get more couch
time. But operating outside your normal routine only increases
anxiety. Instead, stay in your comfort zone. Go to work. Take out the
garbage. Eat normally. As über-coach Jack Daniels says, “Most great
performances come when you’re not trying to do it. When you try to
do something special, it usually backfires.”
5 Training through the race: Sometimes runners decide the best way
to deal with race anxiety—about their fitness, training, and race
readiness—is to treat the race like a workout. “I don’t have to worry
about my performance,” the thinking goes, “because I’m just training
through the race.” Don’t do this. A race is a 100 percent effort no
matter how you approach it. You need a modest taper prior to race
day and a short period of recovery afterward. Otherwise, you risk
overloading your body with an effort it can’t handle.
--- PAGE 97 ---
If there’s a common theme to all these jitters, it’s this: A lack of
confidence in your race-readiness can lead to mistakes that sabotage your
race. It’s a self-fulfilling prophecy. Instead, trust your training. If the race
doesn’t go as planned, see Key 25 on post-race assessment.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 98 ---
KEY
23
Race-Day Guidelines (Pre-Race)
Finally, your 5K race day arrives. After months of training, it’s time to
claim your improved 5K performance. Don’t blow it by making silly
mistakes.
Rule number one: Arrive early. You’re already excited about the race.
There’s no need to turn excitement into anxiety by arriving late. So allow
yourself plenty of time to deal with the usual race-day complications. These
can include (but are not limited to):
Traffic jams: Expect highways and streets leading to the race to
experience heavy traffic, as all race participants converge on the venue
at about the same time.
Parking: Don’t assume there will be parking near the race-staging area.
Race-adjacent parking tends to fill up fast, and you might end up with a
longer walk than you expected.
Registration lines: If bib pickup is on race day, expect a wait. It takes
time to log in participants, check IDs, and hand over race bibs, timing
chips, and goody bags.
Porta Potty lines: These get longer as the start time draws closer. A
short line an hour out becomes a DMV-type line with 15 minutes to go.
Race directors rent Porta Potties based on overall attendance—not on
demand during the final, frantic minutes pre-race.
--- PAGE 99 ---
Gear change: If you intend to change your shirt, shorts, or shoes
between warm-up and race, expect it to take longer than usual. When
you get nervous, your fingers don’t work very well—a good reason to
safety-pin your race bib to your race shirt well in advance.
Start-line positioning: Some race participants forgo the warm-up
altogether and make a beeline for the start line. If you’re worried about
where you’ll be standing when the horn goes off, factor extra time at the
start line into your warm-up equation.
Rule number two: Speaking of your warm-up, race day is no time to
experiment with it. Instead, you’ll want to use the exact same warm-up—
the same mix of jogging, strides, and dynamic stretching—that you’ve used
during training before hard workouts (and, yes, you should be doing a
warm-up before all hard workouts; on pp. 124–125, you’ll find specific
warm-ups for each type of training).
Your warm-up has a simple physiological purpose: It prepares your
muscles, nervous system, endocrine system (i.e., your hormones), and
energy systems for the demands of a hard effort. But it also has a more
important psychological purpose: It puts you in your comfort zone. As you
perform your regular warm-up routine, you experience the familiar
sensations that precede your hard workouts. Your muscles lose their
stiffness. Your breathing settles down as your aerobic system kicks into
gear. Your anxiety about facing a race effort is lessened because you’re
reminded that your body can handle a hard effort—just as it handles your
hard workouts.
Bottom line: Performing your regular warm-up takes the abnormal
situation of toeing a race start line with hundreds (or thousands) of runners
and makes it feel normal.
--- PAGE 100 ---
And yes, you’ll see scores of runners performing warm-ups that are
different from yours. And, yes, some of these runners might be faster than
you. That doesn’t mean you should change your warm-up to copy theirs.
For all you know, they have no idea why they’re warming up the way they
are—maybe they’re copying somebody else. Stick with what you know.
One final piece of advice: Be prepared to stand at the start line beyond
the scheduled race start time. With late runner arrivals, speeches by local
dignitaries, etc., races often start 10–15 minutes late. Yes, you’ll lose some
of your warm-up. No, you won’t lose all of it. Don’t let it fluster you. If you
get too frustrated or anxious, it will take its toll during the race.
“Standing on the starting line, we’re all cowards.”
—Alberto Salazar
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 101 ---
KEY
24
Racing Guidelines
You toe the line for your 5K race. The starting horn sounds. Now what?
Now you run a mistake-free race that nets you your 5K goal performance.
To accomplish this, you’ll want to adhere to a few simple guidelines:
1 No sprinting off the start line: While you want to make sure you
have good position 400 meters into the race, that doesn’t mean
sprinting off the start line. Recall from Key 7 that the first 30–40
seconds of the race will be the most anaerobic. The faster you run, the
more negative by-products of anaerobic energy production you’ll
accumulate. That translates to increased fatigue early in the race and
a painful slog to the finish. This doesn’t mean you should dawdle.
Get up to race pace quickly. But don’t sprint. The laws of physiology
don’t get suspended just because it’s a race.
2 Don’t “bank time”: Some runners try to run the first mile 10–20
seconds faster than goal pace. They think this allows wiggle room
later in the race. It doesn’t. Running 10–20 seconds faster than 5K
pace puts you right on 3K pace. A 3K is a little less than 2 miles.
That means you’re running a pace you can sustain for less than 2
miles, while thinking you’ll somehow stretch your effort to more than
3 miles. You won’t. You’ll bonk.
3 No mid-race mini-battles: There is only one finish line, and it’s at
the finish. Yes, we’ve all been there—in the middle of a race, settled
--- PAGE 102 ---
into our pace, when suddenly some hard-charging runner edges ahead
of us. A primitive fight-or-flight response kicks in, and you think,
“No way!” So you fight off the challenge. Congratulations, you just
sabotaged your 5K. Accelerating mid-race demands greater muscle-
fiber recruitment and an increase in anaerobic energy production.
There’s a price to pay for that. It’s called fatigue.
4 Draft off other runners: There’s a physiological benefit to running
directly behind other runners. By cutting down wind resistance, you
decrease the amount of force you must produce. There’s also a
psychological advantage. Instead of having to focus on pace, you
relax and let someone else worry about it. As long as other runners
are setting a pace that matches your goal, use them to your advantage.
5 Run tangents: The shortest distance between two points is a straight
line. If you see that you’ll be making a left-hand or right-hand turn up
ahead, run a straight line toward that corner (unless your straight line
takes you through another runner, in which case you’ll need to opt for
a slightly modified course). And if you’re running through a gradual
curve, hug the inside. Just as running in lane two on a track forces
you to run farther than in lane one, running wide on a turn adds
distance to your race.
6 You’re not alone: It sometimes seems as if the runners around you
look fresher and less stressed than you feel. You start to think that
maybe you’re in over your head. You’re not. The other runners are
just as tired as you. If they weren’t, they’d be way ahead of you.
7 Don’t quit when your brain yells, “Quit!”: There will come a time
in your 5K when you’ll want to quit. You’re tired. You hurt. You start
to think it isn’t your day. Maybe you even think, If I faked an injury,
no one would blame me for stopping. Don’t do it. This is just your
brain trying to sabotage your race. Remember what we discussed in
Key 13: Your brain is a worrywart. It’s sounding a five-alarm
warning—fatigue and self-doubt—to get you to give up. Hang in
--- PAGE 103 ---
there. Your brain will chill after a minute or two, just in time for you
to kick to the finish line.
8 Target an even effort for your race: This is probably the most
important advice in this book. Run 98 percent of the race, from the
start line until the moment you begin your finish sprint, at an even
effort. Effort. Not pace. There’s a difference.
Even pace: You run each mile (or kilometer) of your race at the same,
predetermined pace (e.g., 6-minutes-per-mile). The problem with this
approach is twofold. First, terrain, weather, and the presence of other
runners makes it hard to do. Second, you simply don’t know what the
“right” pace will be for race day—guess too fast, and your legs won’t
last; guess too slow, and you rob yourself of the chance to snag a
massive PR.
Even effort: You choose a consistent level of energy expenditure that
feels right for race day. You rely on external and internal cues to adjust
your pace. Your effort won’t “feel” the same throughout the 5K. You’ll
experience increasing fatigue as the race progresses. But you’ll burn
energy at a consistent rate. To succeed with this approach takes practice,
practice, practice. The good news is that a proper training program
provides that practice. (One trick I’ve used for years is to ask myself at
intervals throughout a race, “Can I make it to the finish line at this
pace?”—it’s amazing how accurate the feedback from that simple
question can be, if you’re willing to take it.)
--- PAGE 104 ---
Implementing the advice in the previous eight guidelines will result in a
race that hurts less and gets you to the finish line faster.
“Do. Or do not. There is no try.”
—Yoda
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 105 ---
KEY
25
Assess Your Performance
You did it. You completed a 5K race. Maybe you exceeded expectations.
Maybe you met them. Maybe you stunk up the joint.
No matter your result, you’ll want to assess your performance.
With the help of the Post-Race Assessment, take some time to evaluate
your performance as it relates to training, race preparation, and race
execution. Then, use what you’ve learned to better prepare for your next
5K.
First, give yourself time to recover from the race—physically and
psychologically—before trying to process the experience. Assessments
made in the finish chute, whether negative (“I’m never doing that again!”)
or positive (“Wow, I was fast!”), often fade after a few hours, or a few days,
of reflection—maybe you only hurt during the race due to a racing error,
maybe you were fast because the course was a quarter-mile short.
Once you’re ready for an objective assessment, target some specific
areas of concern.
Base training: Setting aside how you felt about your performance, was
your base fitness adequate to complete the race distance?
Race preparation: Did your training prepare you to go the entire 5K
distance at your targeted pace/effort, or did the bottom drop out before
the race was completed?
Race goal: Was it achievable? If you met it, the answer is, “Yes.” If you
ran slower, was your goal too aggressive? Or do you feel it’s within
--- PAGE 106 ---
reach with another race or two?
Race execution: Did you adhere to the race guidelines from Key 24, or
did you decide to wing it—and maybe hit a 5K wall at about 3K?
Race choice: Was the race itself a good choice, given your personal
goals? If your goal was a time, was the race conducive to a fast pace
(e.g., flat with few turns)? If you raced for a challenging experience, did
the terrain and competition match your expectations?
Race essentials: How about everything else? How were your shoes?
Were your legs springy during the race? How was your overall energy
level? Did you arrive early enough, find parking, register, and warm up
without having to scramble to the start line?
After assessing your race, remember this: It was just one race. Change
things that clearly need changing—like if you ate too big a breakfast and
had to make a pit stop during the race—but be patient with everything else.
A few years back, I agreed to coach an athlete, Diana, who’d clocked
23:09 for 5K. She wanted to improve. After three months of training, she
entered a 5K. I warned her to expect resistance from her brain—that her
brain hadn’t raced for several months and would object to the effort. She
ran 23:03 and wasn’t happy. Two weeks later, she ran 22:11. Two weeks
after that, 21:08. Soon, she was down to 20:22. Diana’s race times dropped
at an astounding rate. But it wasn’t a case of her fitness improving.
Remember, physical changes occur incrementally. Instead, Diana’s brain
had gradually accepted that a faster 5K wasn’t going to kill her. Her brain
allowed her to access the physiological adaptations she’d earned with her
training.
--- PAGE 107 ---
So train properly. And race smart. And assess your fitness and
performance, the better to train and race well in the future. But be patient,
too.
The 25 keys in this book will help you run a faster 5K, but the advice is
only as good as your willingness to take it. There are effective training,
--- PAGE 108 ---
lifestyle, and race execution adjustments you can make to absolutely
become a better 5K runner. But there are no shortcuts. That’s what I love
about our sport. When we train better, we get fitter, and we race faster.
There is no luck in running—no hitting a one-in-a-million full-court swish
with a basketball. By training and living correctly, we earn every result.
“The only real mistake is the one from which we learn nothing.”
—John Powell, Jesuit priest and author
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 109 ---
BONUS MASTERS KEY
Age-Related Adjustments & Advice
Masters runners sometimes ask me why my books and magazine articles
offer so little in the way of masters-specific training adjustments and
advice.
The answer is simple. There are no super-secret adjustments or
workouts for masters runners. We have to do the same training as younger
runners—just a little less of it, at a slightly reduced intensity, with a little
more time between hard workouts.
I’ve love to tell you that “age is just a number” or that “you’re only as
old as you feel,” but the reality is that masters undergo physiological
changes that must be acknowledged. As a masters runner, I’ve set American
5K records for age groups 45–49, 50–54, and 55–59. But the difference
between my age 45 record and my age 55 record is more than a minute
(hint: I got slower, not faster). This isn’t meant to discourage you. On the
contrary, I felt wonderful running all of those records. But I only succeeded
because I adjusted my training to the realities of aging.
Several things happen to our running bodies as we age:
Our VO2max decreases.
We lose faster (fast-twitch and intermediate) muscle fibers.
We suffer decreased mobility in our hips and ankles.
Our connective tissue (bones, tendons, ligaments, and cartilage)
becomes less supple and more fragile.
Our nervous system performs less efficiently.
Our bodies take longer to heal and require additional recovery
between workouts.
--- PAGE 110 ---
I call masters training a “no-mistake zone.” If we make a single mistake
—if we run a repetition workout too hard, or sleep too little before a long
run, or shortchange our warm-up before a race—we pay for it. And
payment usually takes the form of injury, illness, burnout, or, at a minimum,
substandard performance.
On the other hand, if you train correctly and perform every workout
(and recovery) by the book, you can expect to achieve top fitness and run a
remarkable 5K.
With that faster 5K in mind, here are some masters guidelines you’ll
want to consider:
No junk miles: Overall mileage is still important, but that doesn’t mean
you should squeeze extra distance into workouts. No 3-mile cooldown
runs after hard workouts; 5–10 minutes will do the trick. No extending
distance runs a mile or two to hit arbitrary weekly totals—like shooting
for 50 miles instead of 49. And sorry, no long feel-good runs
immediately post-race; your body needs recovery, not celebratory miles.
Skip the final repetition: Masters legend Nolan Shaheed (4:25 mile at
age 51 and 4:53 at age 62) once told me, “I always skip the final
repetition of an intervals workout—that’s the one that injures you.”
Early in a workout, your muscles absorb most of the impact force that
occurs with each foot strike. But as your muscles fatigue, more and
more of that impact force gets transferred to your connective tissue.
Tired muscles and overstressed connective tissue make those final
repetitions a minefield for injury. Obviously, it doesn’t work to say
you’re going to run a certain number of reps while knowing you’ll do
less. The real point is this: End a hard workout while your legs are still
feeling strong.
Train only as hard as required: You have a limited ability to adapt
from any single workout. When you run harder than required to
stimulate the desired adaptation, you increase the time it takes to
recover and elevate your risk of injury. While this is good advice for
runners of all ages, it should be a rule for masters runners.
--- PAGE 111 ---
Recover, recover, recover: You don’t get fit while you’re training; you
get fit while you’re recovering. Review Key 19 if you need a refresher
course on this concept. Between hard workouts, you need time to
recover from the first workout and then to supercompensate. Most
masters athletes in their 40s can get by with 2–3 days between hard
outings (no more than 2–3 hard outings per week). Runners a decade or
two—or three or four—older might manage only a single hard workout
per week. Bottom line: Don’t run your next hard workout until you’ve
recovered from the previous one.
Pick your races: I have masters friends who race every weekend. More
power to them! But if you’re like me, that’s a recipe for injury, burnout,
and poor performance. As older runners, many of us need to limit our
total races. Since masters runners require a minimum of a week to
recover from a 5K (more for longer races), weekly races curtail the
amount of hard training we can perform, which in turn limits the
opportunity to improve our fitness and run faster. And because races are
100 percent efforts, racing every weekend eventually becomes a load
that our bodies can’t handle. We get slower. Races feel harder. And we
begin to wonder if, in the words of Roger Murtaugh (played by Danny
Glover) from the film Lethal Weapon, we’re “getting too old for this
sh#t.”
Limit the crosstraining: If your goal is all-around fitness, then
crosstrain. But if your goal is a faster 5K, most cross won’t help. I can
hear the howls of outrage. We oldsters are constantly told that we must
crosstrain—as if getting older suddenly imbues crosstraining with a
magic that eludes younger runners. There’s a physiological principle
called “specificity of training.” It requires that an athlete—young or old
—train their muscle fibers, nervous system, and energy systems in the
exact way they’ll be used during competition. So while riding a bike
improves your cycling, it doesn’t make you a better runner. You’ll get
some benefit from limited crosstraining—we’ve discussed the benefits
of resistance training, and the elliptical machine and ElliptiGO bike are
great options when you’re injured—but that doesn’t justify setting aside
--- PAGE 112 ---
a large percentage of your training time and energy for non-running-
specific exercise.
Embrace age-grading: Age-grading scores your 5K result (as well as
results from other race distances) as a percentage of the maximum
expected performance for your age. Given that we all slow down as we
age, this offers a way to track your age-adjusted performance from one
year to the next—or to compare your current time against times from
years past. You can find these calculators online.
As a masters runner, I’ve competed in track, cross-country, and road
racing. I’ve set records from 1500 meters to the half-marathon. But if
pressed to name my favorite race, it would be the 5K. Training for the 5K
has it all: distance, drills, hills, tempo, repetitions, sprints, resistance
training, and more. Racing the 5K challenges every aspect of our fitness:
endurance, speed, strength, and race discipline. Best of all, post-5K, we
recover quickly. We can get right back to training and planning our next
race. Honestly, masters racing doesn’t get any better than that.
“I’ve learned that it’s what you do with the miles, rather than how many
you’ve run.”
—Rod DeHaven, American Olympic marathoner
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 113 ---
PART
FOUR
WORKOUTS & TRAINING
PLANS
1 Warm-Up Routines
2 Length of Distance Runs
3 Training Paces
4 Training Schedules
Beginner’s 12-Week Plan
2-Week Adjustment for 5K Race (Beginners)
12-Week Plan
16-Week Extended Plan
12-Week Low-Intensity Plan
2-Week Adjustment for 5K Race
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 115 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 116 ---
Note: Wondering how many miles each run should be? This table breaks down the required distance
for each of your runs. It does not factor in hard workouts (e.g., VO2max reps, hill repeats). To
include those, keep track of a workout’s total mileage, then distribute or subtract the difference in
mileage over the rest of the week. Blank cells indicate there isn’t a safe or effective combination of
runs for that mileage/days-per-week combination. To use the table, find your weekly mileage goal on
the left, then scan right to find the suggested distance for your runs based on the number of
--- PAGE 117 ---
days/week you will train. Numbers in parentheses indicate the amount of extra weekly mileage
required to hit your goal; you’ll need to lower your mileage goal, add more training days, or add
second runs. (Note: Second runs are done in the a.m. or p.m. of days you’re already running. They
should be 3–5 miles, run at an easy/recovery pace.)
--- PAGE 118 ---
Note: Wondering how many miles to run on non-hard workout days? If you’re a competitive runner
who includes two hard workouts (e.g. VO2max reps, hill repeats, tempo) in your weekly training
program, then this table is your guide. Blank cells indicate there isn’t a safe or effective combination
of runs for that mileage/days-per-week combination. To use the table, find your weekly mileage goal
on the left, then scan right to find the suggested distance for your runs based on the number of
days/week you will train. Numbers in parentheses indicate the amount of extra weekly mileage
required to hit your mileage goal; youll need to lower your mileage goal, add more training days, or
add second runs. (Note: second runs are done in the a.m. or p.m. of days you are already running.
They should be 3–5 miles at an easy/recovery pace.)
--- PAGE 119 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 121 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 122 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 123 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 124 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 125 ---
Note: Recommended paces are given as a range. Fit runners should target the faster end of the
range; beginner runners or those struggling with the faster pace can target the slower end of the
range.
*Runners with a 5K time of 40 min.+ may require training-pace adjustments, such as: 1) Opt for
walk/jog workouts in place of distance runs until fitness/running pace improves; 2) Run both tempo
and VO2max work at 5K pace, since 5K pace often represents only a slight increase in pace over
normal distance runs; 3) Speed up distance paces if the table’s listed running pace isn’t comfortable
for you.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 126 ---
Training Schedules
This book offers you four training plans to choose from:
1 Beginner’s 12-Week Plan (plus 3 weeks base training): This plan is
for new runners and those returning to the sport after a long absence.
Some readers won’t be ready to run on day one, so the plan offers
three weeks of base training, during which your muscles, connective
tissue, aerobic system, and nervous system will be prepared for the
challenge of training. This plan is aggressive and assumes runners are
focused on running a fast 5K.
2 12-Week Plan (plus 1 week base training): This plan is for
experienced athletes who are currently engaged in an exercise
program, whether that is at least three days of running per week or a
similar schedule of activities such as soccer, cycling, basketball, or
aerobics.
3 16-Week Extended Plan (plus 1 week base training): This plan
includes training from all 15 training keys and is very aggressive.
4 12-Week Low-Intensity Plan: This plan allows runners to craft their
own program—whether this is because of a preference for a more
distance-oriented schedule, a lack of appropriate facilities (e.g., a
track, trail, or hills), or to complement a custom-tailored schedule. The
program suggests one Monday workout per week and offers advice for
--- PAGE 127 ---
other days, but consider it a “Mr. Potato Head,” where you pick the
variation you like, for the self-coached runner.
Most plans include 1 week of extra base training (i.e., one more week of
preparatory training for runners with limited fitness backgrounds). Runners
who are already including reps (or even strides) in their programs won’t
need this, but runners who’ve focused strictly on distance will want to prep
their legs for varied pace work. As for frequency, all 12-week plans are
formatted for runners scheduling 3–7 days of running per week. The 16-
week extended plan requires runners to schedule a minimum of 4 days of
running per week, with the option of running up to 7 days per week. Finally,
every plan allows runners to choose their number of training days per week,
mileage, and paces for workouts. To get the most out of your training, refer
to these tables:
Warm-Up Routines (page 124): It’s important to warm up before
hard workouts. This table couples various workouts with a suggested
warm-up.
Length of Distance Runs (page 126): These two tables split your
weekly mileage into “distance runs” and “long runs.” The first table
assumes an all-distance schedule, with no “hard” workouts—but you
can add hard workouts to your schedule by calculating the mileage
for those workouts and then adjusting the week’s remaining runs. The
second table is for use with the training schedules and factors in the
mileage required to perform two hard workouts each week. Both
tables help you pick the proper length for your runs.
Training Paces (page 128 ): Find your current 5K pace in the left-
hand column, then use the training paces in the targeted row. If you
don’t know your 5K pace, either guesstimate a time or guesstimate
training effort during your workouts.
Basic Rules for All Plans
--- PAGE 128 ---
1 Follow workouts in the order they’re presented: Workouts create
changes in your body that are required to run future workouts and to
reinforce past ones. Changing the order (or the workout) sabotages
both the work you’ve done and the work you’ll do.
2 Stick to prescribed paces: The pace prescribed for a workout isn’t
about time; it’s about the muscle fibers, energy systems, and nervous-
system recruitment represented by that pace. Running faster or slower
changes the workout. If you were mailing a package from Florida to
Texas, and your delivery service proudly announced they’d shipped
the package all the way to California, you wouldn’t thank them for
shipping it farther than requested. Same for running your workouts
too hard.
3 Don’t skimp on recovery: You can alter the schedules so that hard
days and long runs better match your personal schedule, but do not
eliminate recovery between hard sessions in order to make that
happen. Running two hard days in a row is a program killer.
4 Your success is a product of your training: Athletes sometimes ask
me if they can find the same success running 3–4 days a week as
running 6–7 days a week. The answer is simple: no. As long as you
train smart, balancing hard work and recovery, you’ll see better
results by running more. Coaches, books, or articles that promise you
differently are lying. You can get fit on 3–4 days per week. But
runners who can handle higher volume (not everyone can) will get
fitter on 5 days. More so on 6 or 7 days. Decide what’s right for your
schedule and goals. And be honest about how much training your
body can absorb; part of what makes some runners “elite” is that their
bodies can absorb a workload that would injure mere mortals. But at
the end of the day, your 5K will be a product of your training. So
choose wisely.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 129 ---
READY, SET, GO!
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 130 ---
This plan is for those training 3–5 days per week and does not include
specific days for a post-run stretching and exercise routine or an injury-
prevention and resistance training routine (see Key 14). The former routine
can be scheduled for any day of the week, though regular distance-run days
are advised. The latter routine should not be combined with a Monday or
Wednesday hard workout.
Runners who want to race before Week 12 should use the 2-Week
Adjustment schedule at the end of this schedule (not the adjustment on
--- PAGE 131 ---
pp. 174–175). It’s recommended that you complete at least the first six
weeks of this schedule before planning a race.

--- PAGE 139 ---
Note: Once you’ve completed this schedule, you can continue training by picking up at Week 5 or 6
in the 12-Week Plan, or by designing your own plan using the 12-Week Low-Intensity Plan (start
anywhere in the plan).
During a surge, you pick up the pace to a prescribed intensity for a prescribed period of time.
Strides are 40–80m pick-ups.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 140 ---
For beginners who choose to race before the 12th week.

--- PAGE 141 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 142 ---
This schedule applies to runners training 3–7 days/week, and does not
include specified days for a post-run stretching and exercise routine or an
injury-prevention and resistance training routine (Key 14). The former
routine can be scheduled for any day of the week, though regular distance
run days are advised. The latter routine should not be combined with a
Mon. or Wed. hard workout.

--- PAGE 143 ---
Runners who want to race before Week 10 can use the 2-Week
Adjustment schedule on pp. 174–175, but it’s highly recommended that
you complete at least the first five weeks of this schedule before
planning a race.

--- PAGE 149 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 150 ---
This schedule applies to runners training 4–7 days/week, and does not
include specified days for a post-run stretching and exercise routine or an
injury-prevention and resistance training routine (Key 14). The former
routine can be scheduled for any day of the week, though regular distance
run days are advised. The latter routine should not be combined with a
Mon. or Wed. hard workout.
Runners who want to race before Week 13 can use the 2-Week
Adjustment schedule on pp. 174–175, but it’s recommended that you
complete at least the first six weeks of this schedule before planning a
race.
--- PAGE 161 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 162 ---
This plan is a framework for runners who want to create their own plan.
Monday’s workouts offer a standard, low-key progression of training
designed to improve aerobic energy–producing capacity. You fill in the
other days. Use the tables on pp. 126–127 to determine your distance runs.
The post-run stretching and exercises routine and the injury-prevention and
resistance training routine (Key 14) can be added on days of your choosing.
Use the 2-Week Adjustment on pp. 174–175 when you’re ready to race a
5K.

--- PAGE 163 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 164 ---
For runners who choose to race before the first scheduled 5K in their
training plans.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 165 ---
Acknowledgments
Toeing a 5K race start line, I feel utterly, nakedly alone. The gun goes off—
or the horn sounds—and whatever happens next depends completely on me.
If I go out too fast, I pay by the end. If my fitness isn’t up to par, I pay no
matter what I do. And even if things go perfectly, I have to deal with the
pain of the last mile myself, forcing it aside in order to complete my race
plan.
Thank goodness writing a book about the 5K is not like running one.
Here, I had an amazing team helping me every step of the way,
correcting missteps and contributing ideas, edits, and the types of additions
that make a book worth reading.
Before thanking individuals, I’d like to thank VeloPress, my publisher,
for its faith in both me, as an author, and this book. Every writer dreams of
having a committed and supportive publisher. I’ve got one. And I never
take that for granted.
Next, I’d like to thank Casey Blaine, my editor, for suggesting this
project and then applying her skill and commitment to mold it into final
form. I’d also like to thank Sarah Gorecki, the project editor, and Christine
Bucher, the manuscript’s copyeditor. Big thanks to Vicki Hopewell, the
book’s creative director, for giving Fast 5K a look and feel that matches my
passion for the race. Thanks also to Kara Mannix and Dave Trendler,
marketing and sales, for their steady hand in navigating the path that lands
this book in its intended audience’s hands.
Finally, I’d like to thank every runner who’s ever toed a 5K start line
with me. One of my archrivals in masters (age 40-plus) competition once
asked me why I kept writing articles that gave away my training secrets. I
told him, “If you train incorrectly and slow down, you’ll quit. If I help you
to train better and race faster, you won’t. I love this sport, and there’s no
--- PAGE 166 ---
sport without you. I’ll do whatever it takes to keep you coming back.” So
thank you, fellow 5Kers, for our sport. I’ll see you at the start line!
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 167 ---
Index
The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the pages in your e-book.
Links from the page numbers below should take you to the page with the term of interest, but
locations may vary depending on the e-reader settings and font size.
Page numbers in bold refer to tables and figures.
acceleration, 10, 14, 26, 33, 41, 66, 75, 81, 110
Achilles tendinitis, 8, 30, 53, 101
Achilles tendon, strides and, 66
activities, strenuous, 93
adaptations, 13, 14, 27, 30, 54, 119; beneficial, 37; physiological, 116; reality and, 93
adjustments, ix; masters-specific training, 117; race execution, 116
aerobic energy, 13, 21, 27; production of, 31, 33, 37, 38, 39
aerobic enzymes, 38
aerobic system, 23–24, 37, 106, 135
age: performance and, 120; realities of, 117
air squats, described, 59
Ali, Muhammad: quote of, 31
allergy attacks, 97
anaerobic energy, 26, 109; burning, 14, 27; by-products of, 18; production of, 31, 110
anxiety, 101, 102, 105, 106
assessment, 45, 116; post-race, 113, 114, 115
bank time, avoiding, 109
barefoot running, 84
Beginner’s 12-Week Plan: described, 135; schedule for, 140–149
biceps, 9
blood vessels, 21
BMI, calculating, 79, 80
bodily functions, maintaining, 80
bones, 87, 117
bonking, 109
Boston Marathon, 91
bounding, described, 69
brain, 49, 116; resistance from, 111, 114
Bryant, Paul “Bear”: quote of, 2
burnout, 118, 119
--- PAGE 168 ---
butt kicks, described, 70
cadence, 46; improving, 34, 42, 54
calories: energy expenditure and, 93; restrictions on, 81
capillaries, 14, 18, 21, 22, 38
carbohydrates, 35, 38, 75, 76, 77; eating, 89; production of, 37; sources of, 18; using, 21, 77
Carlsbad 5000: 91
cartilage, 117
Centers for Disease Control (CDC), 79
Central Governor Theory, 49
coaching, 91
Coe, Lord Sebastian, 29
comfort zone, 102
competition, 114, 120; mental approach to, 2
complications, race-day, 105
confidence, lack of, 104
connective tissues, 8, 18, 39, 42, 45, 49, 91, 118, 135; less supple/more fragile, 117; overstressed,
119; strengthening, 13
contraction, 66; concentric, 41, 66; eccentric, 41, 42
core strength, improved, 54
CrossFit, 92
crosstraining, 92, 120
curves, running through, 110
Daniels, Jack, 18, 102
daydreamer, described, 58
DeHaven, Rod: quote of, 121
Dellinger, Bill: quote of, 13
Dicharry, Jay, 65
Dick, Philip K.: on reality, 93
diet, 76, 79, 80, 97; goals, 81; metabolism and, 81; planning, 75; proper, 77; training, 80
distance running, 16, 26, 33, 118; cumulative volume of, 13; downhill running and, 42; effective, 22;
length of, 126, 136; length of/competitive plan, 127; regular-length, 35, 97
DOMS, 41
downhill running, 31, 41; benefits of, 43; distance running and, 42; masters runners and, 44; recovery
and, 42; scheduling, 43; workout progression for, 43, 43
drafting, benefits of, 110
drills, 83, 102, 121; technique, 65, 67–70
Durant, Will: quote of, 20
eating, 91, 97
efficiency: improving, 83; running, 18; stride, 65, 66
effort, 35; comfortable, 13; even, 111–112; glycogen and, 80; regulating, 49; targeted, 113; training,
137
elastic recoil, improving, 65, 66
ElliptiGO bikes, 120
endocrine system, preparing, 106
--- PAGE 169 ---
endurance, ix, 75, 121
energy, 14; absorbing, 65; burning, 93, 112; creating, 29, 80; fat as, 38; 5K-race, 37; losing, 42, 80;
releasing, 65; sources of, 76; systems, 45, 137
excellence, as habit, 20
exercise, 81; fats and, 76; injury-prevention, 53, 54; low-intensity, 76; nutrition and, 76; post-run,
56–58; regulating, 49
experience, 1, 6, 50
fast-twitch fibers, 10, 11, 27, 31, 117
fat, total body, 79
fatigue, 14, 87, 111, 112, 118; excessive, 6, 24; glycogen levels and, 75; nervous-system, 18, 89, 99
fats, 75, 76; as energy, 38; exercise and, 76; minimizing, 76; sweat and, 80; using, 21, 77, 77
feedback, 2, 112
feeling good, 88, 118
fitness, ix, 102; all-round, 120; assessing, 45, 116; improving, 1, 24, 45, 114, 119–120; level, 19
flat-footed marching, described, 68
flat runs, 31; hill runs and, 30, 30
flats, weight of, 83
flexibility, 42; ankle, 30
force: generating, 33, 34, 49; impact, 34, 65, 118
gear, changing, 106
Gerschler, Woldemar: interval training and, 25
glycogen, 76; effort and, 80; fatigue and, 75; muscle, 81; sparing, 38
glycogen stores, 38, 75, 80
goal-pace repetitions, 46, 56; progression of, 47, 47
goals: achieving, 8; diet, 81; performance, 1, 2; race, 114; running, 53, 93; schedule and, 138;
workload, 8
Great Rift Valley, training in, 29
half-marathon pace, described, 17
half-marathons, 121
Hamilton, Laird: quote of, 101
hamstrings, 9, 44, 91, 92
heart, strengthening, 14, 25
heavy legs, 99
heel dips, described, 63
high knees, described, 68
high skipping, described, 67
hill reps, 31; benefits of, 33, 34; effort for, 35; flat runs versus, 30, 30; workout progression for, 35,
35
hills, 83, 121; adding, 29–30; benefits of, 33; resistance training and, 30; running, 30, 31, 97
hobbies, strenuous, 93
hormones, 76, 87, 106
hydrogen ions, 18
illnesses, 97, 118
--- PAGE 170 ---
improvement, 1, 14, 30, 39, 42, 54, 65, 76, 79, 80, 83, 105, 114; incremental, 2; long-term, 15
injuries, 92, 111, 118; disabiling, 53; estimated number of, 55, 55; phantom, 101; preventing, 7, 53,
59–64, 91; risk of, 119; spontaneous, 101; suffering, 54
intensity, 44, 75, 76; increase in, 6, 7; limiting, 89; volume and, 6
intermediate fibers, 10, 18, 22, 30, 37; losing, 117
International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance, 53–54
intervals: recovery, 18, 24, 25, 26, 27, 34; traditional, 27
IT band syndrome, 53
Jackson, Phil: quote of, 10
jitters, 101
jogging, 25, 34, 106
Johnson, Brooks, 26
jump training, 65
junk miles, avoiding, 118
Kastor, Deena: quote of, 24
knee lift, improving, 42
lactate, utilizing/clearing, 18
LaLanne, Jack: quote of, 76
leg lifts, described, 57
leg stiffness, 42
Lie Zi, quote of, 83
lifestyle, ix, x, 3, 116
ligaments, 65, 117
Lindgren, Gerry: training by, 5
long skipping, described, 68
Lydiard, Arthur: hill training and, 29
macronutrients, 77
Magill, Sean, 15
Magness, Steve, 76
marathon pace, described, 17
marathoners, 37; training for, 54
marathons, 39
masters runners, 116, 119, 121; downhill running and, 44
metabolism, 80; dieting and, 81
minerals, 77
minimum-2-minute repetition rule, 24
mistakes, common, 101
mitochondria, 21, 33; increasing, 13, 18; VO2max and, 22
mobility, decreased, 117
Murtaugh, Roger, 120
muscle balance, improved, 54
muscle damage, excess, 89
--- PAGE 171 ---
muscle fibers, 21, 27, 31, 45, 80, 137; creating, 38; increasing volume of, 29; muscle groups and, 29;
nutrients for, 14; performance and, 12; recruiting, 34, 39, 42, 110; repaired, 99; shutting down,
49; training, 9, 12, 120; types of, 10, 12; using, 31, 37; at various paces, 11, 11
muscle glycogen, 37, 102; stores of, 38, 38
muscle mass, lean, 80, 81
muscles, 9, 45, 49, 87, 91, 135; preparing, 106; running, 9; skeletal, 80; tired, 119
nervous system, 18, 45, 46, 101, 102, 118, 135; fatigue and, 89, 99; improving, 14, 39; preparing,
106, 137; reaction time of, 65
neural pathways, 31
neuromuscular function, 65
neurotransmitters, 87
Noakes, Timothy, 49
Nordic curls, described, 62–63
nutrition, 14, 77; exercise and, 76
overexertion, 91
overtraining, 45, 87
oxygen, 14, 21, 26, 54
pace, 6, 14, 44, 110, 111, 112, 136; correct, 13; fast, 31, 114; 5K, 22, 31; goal, 45, 46, 47; half-
marathon, 18, 19; incorrect, 17; marathon, 18; race, 109; 60-minute, 18, 19; sticking to, 137;
targeted, 113; tempo, 18; 10K, 22; training, 128–133, 137; VO2max and, 15
pain: acute, 101; lower back, 53; minor, 101
parking, 105
performance, 22, 44, 102; age and, 120; assessing, 113, 114, 116; goal, 1, 2, 109; improving, 1, 76,
105; long-term, 2; muscle fibers and, 12; plyometrics and, 71, 71; poor, 118, 119; resistance
training and, 71, 71; shoe weight and, 84, 85, 85; weight loss and, 79
physical changes, 114–115
physiological issues, 6, 87, 109, 110
Pirie, Gordon, 101
planks, described, 64
plantar fasciitis, 53
plyometrics, 65, 66; performance and, 71, 71
Powell, John: quote of, 116
power, losing, 80
pre-race checklist, 107
preparation, 2; pre-race, 105, 107; race, 50, 113
protein, 75, 77; cells/hormones and, 76; consuming, 76, 89
psychological requirements, 6, 106
quadriceps, strengthening, 41
quick feet, described, 69
quick hops, described, 69
race checklist, 103, 112
--- PAGE 172 ---
race choice, 84, 114
race discipline, 121
race essentials, 114
race-readiness, 102, 104
races: goal, 50; picking, 119; tune-up, 49, 50, 51, 51
racing: error, 113; masters, 121; potential negative effect of activities on, 92, 92; training and, 102–
103; warm-up routines for, 136
reality, adaptation and, 93
recovery, 24, 39, 99, 113, 119; downhill running and, 42; eliminating, 137; full, 34; hard work and,
88, 138; inadequate, 87; initial, 87; post-tune-up race, 51, 51; time for, 17, 118; walking/jogging,
25; workouts and, 89, 118
registration lines, 105
repetitions, 19, 24, 45, 83, 97, 121; benefits of, 33; downhill, 43; final, 118, 119; goal-pace, 46, 47,
47, 56; hill, 30, 30, 31, 33, 34, 35, 35; individual, 46; short, 25, 26, 26, 65; skipping, 118; track,
45
resistance training, 54, 81, 120, 121; hills and, 30; performance and, 71, 71; routine for, 53, 59–64
rope calf stretch, described, 58
rope hamstring stretch, described, 56
routines: changes in, 102; injury-reversal, 53; resistance training, 53, 59–64; warm-up, 136
run tangents, 110
runner’s knee, 53
Runner’s World, 5
running: barefoot, 84; celebratory, 118; cooldown, 118; fast, 31, 49; feel-good, 118; hard, 49; length
of, 35, 37; light, 79; long, 136; low-volume, 6; recovery, 15; slow, 31; tempo, 33; uphill, 31
running economy, 54, 66; improving, 65, 80; resistance training/plyometrics and, 71
Salazar, Alberto: quote of, 33
schedule: all-distance, 136; distance-oriented, 135; goals and, 138
Schul, Bob, 5
second-guessing syndrome, 102
Shaheed, Nolan, 118
Sheehan, George, 8
shin splints, 8
shoe weight, 83; performance and, 84, 85, 85
single-leg deadlifts, described, 61–62
16-Week Extended Plan Plus 1-Week Base Training: described, 135; schedule for, 160–171
60-minute pace, described, 17
skipping, described, 67
sleep, 89, 91, 97
slow-twitch fibers, 10, 11, 18, 22, 37; capillaries surrounding, 14; flat terrain and, 30; strengthening,
13; training, 13; VO2max and, 15
snacks, eating, 89
Sophocles, quote of, 50
soreness, 41, 58
speed, ix, 102, 121; building, 1, 2
sprints, 46, 109, 121
squats, described, 60
--- PAGE 173 ---
squats with weights, described, 59
Squires, Bill: quote of, 37
stability, improved, 54, 57
start-line position, 106
step-downs, described, 60–61
step-ups, described, 61
stimulus, 6, 25, 27
strategies, race-day, 3
strength, 121; aerobic, 46; explosive, 65
stress: feeling, 110–111; physical/mental, 8
stress fractures, 8
stretch-shortening cycle, 66
stretching, 41, 53, 66; dynamic, 106; post-run, 56–58
stride efficiency, 65, 66
stride length, improving, 42, 54, 65
stride rate, improving, 65
strides, 97, 106; Achilles tendon and, 66; downhill, 43; improving, 30, 42, 54, 65; maintaining, 34
stroke volume, 25, 34; increase in, 25
success, 5, 137–138; benchmarks for, 1; steps to, 3
supercompensation, 87, 89
supplements, 77
tapering: mini-, 97, 98; traditional, 97, 98; traditional versus mini-, 98
technique drills, 65; described, 67–70
temperature, body, 49
tempo, 83, 102, 121; downhill, 41, 43; training for, 20
tempo workouts, 17, 19, 20, 22, 24, 33; at different paces, 19; VO2max training and, 24
10 Percent Rule, 6, 7; 3-Week Rule versus, 7
tendons, 66, 87, 117
3-Week Rule, 7, 8; 10 Percent Rule versus, 7
threshold, 22
times, improving, 79, 83, 114
tissue breakdown, 87, 93
towel toe curls, described, 56
traffic jams, 105
training, ix, x, 3, 114, 116; adjusting, 102; base, 113, 135, 136; benefits of, 87; challenge of, 135;
days, 136; eccentric, 42; hard, 88–89, 101, 119; hill, 29; incorrect, 13; increase in, 8; intensity of,
75; lapses in, 9; masters, 118; muscle fibers and, 12; places, 45; plans, 6, 135, 137–138; potential
negative effect of activities on, 92, 92; racing and, 102–103; rhythm, 99; sabotaging, 13;
scheduling, 45, 91, 92, 93; smart, 101; specificity of, 120; stimulus for, 6; success and, 5, 137–
138
Training Paces table, 23, 27, 128–133
treadmills, 29
trial and error, using, 6
12-Week Low-Intensity Plan: described, 135–136; schedule for, 171–173
12-Week Plan: described, 135; schedule for, 152–159
2-Week Adjustment 5K Race (Beginners), schedule for, 150–151
--- PAGE 174 ---
2-Week Adjustment for 5K Race, schedule for, 174–175
Van de Snepscheut, Jan L. A.: quote of, 97
vitamins, 77
VO2max, 14, 45, 46, 80; decrease in, 117; defining, 22; increase in, 22; slow-twitch fibers and, 15;
tempo training and, 24; at various paces, 15
VO2max workouts, 22, 23–24, 33; sample progression of, 23
volume, 46; cutting, 97; increase in, 6, 7; intensity and, 6; limiting, 89; total, 39
walking, 34
warm-ups: forgoing, 106; performing, 106, 107; time for, 118; various workouts/5K race, 124–125
weight loss: healthy, 80, 81; impact of, 81, 81; performance and, 79
workload, 22; absorbing, 138; adapting to, 8; balancing, 93
Workout Progression for Hill Repeats, 35
workouts: easy, 89; 5K, 33; goal-pace, 46; hard, 50, 81, 83, 88, 89, 93, 106, 117, 119, 136; low-
intensity, 76; medium, 89; number of days for, 6; recovery and, 88, 89, 118; scheduling, 89, 91;
standalone, 65; stimulus for, 25; time between, 89; warm-up routines for, 136
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 175 ---
About the Author
Pete Magill is the lead author of the book Build Your Running Body, author
of The Born Again Runner and SpeedRunner, a former senior writer and
columnist for Running Times magazine, and a current columnist for
PodiumRunner magazine. As a 5K runner, Magill has the fastest-ever
American times for age groups 45–49 (14:34.27 on the track), 50–54 (15:02
on the road), and 55–59 (15:42.13 on the track). He’s a five-time USA
Masters Cross Country Runner of the Year, the fastest-ever 50-plus
American for 10K (31:11), and a 2016 inductee into the USA Track & Field
Masters Hall of Fame. He coaches for the Cal Coast Track Club, California
Triathlon Club, and La Canada High School, and he’s led his clubs to 19
national championships in cross-country and road racing. He lives in
Pasadena, California, and competes for the Cal Coast Track Club.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 176 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 177 ---
OceanofPDF.com