
--- PAGE 3 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 4 ---
 
Daniels’ Running Formula
Fourth Edition
Jack Daniels, PhD
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 5 ---
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Daniels, Jack, 1933- author.
Title: Daniels’ running formula / Jack Daniels, PhD.
Description: Fourth edition. | Champaign, IL : Human Kinetics, [2022] | Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020043304 (print) | LCCN 2020043305 (ebook) | ISBN 9781718203662
(paperback) | ISBN 9781718203679 (epub) | ISBN 9781718203686 (pdf)
Subjects: LCSH: Running. | Running--Training.
Classification: LCC GV1062 .D36 2022 (print) | LCC GV1062 (ebook) | DDC 796.42--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020043304
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020043305
ISBN: 978-1-7182-0366-2 (print)
Copyright © 2022, 2014, 2005, 1998 by Jack Tupper Daniels
Human Kinetics supports copyright. Copyright fuels scientific and artistic endeavor, encourages
authors to create new works, and promotes free speech. Thank you for buying an authorized edition
of this work and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any
part of it in any form without written permission from the publisher. You are supporting authors and
allowing Human Kinetics to continue to publish works that increase the knowledge, enhance the
performance, and improve the lives of people all over the world.
Notwithstanding the above notice, permission to reproduce the following material is granted to
persons and agencies who have purchased this work: pp. 24, 48, 71, and 140.
To report suspected copyright infringement of content published by Human Kinetics, contact us at
permissions@hkusa.com. To request permission to legally reuse content published by Human
Kinetics, please refer to the information at https://US.HumanKinetics.com/pages/permissions-
information.
The web addresses cited in this text were current as of October 2020, unless otherwise noted.
Developmental Editor: Julie Marx Goodreau; Managing Editor: Hannah Werner; Copyeditor:
Annette Pierce; Indexer: Nan N. Badgett; Permissions Manager: Martha Gullo; Graphic
Designer: Julie L. Denzer; Cover Designer: Keri Evans; Cover Design Specialist: Susan Rothermel
Allen; Photograph (cover): JOHN SIBLEY/POOL/AFP via Getty Images; Photographs (interior):
© Human Kinetics, unless otherwise noted; Photo Asset Manager: Laura Fitch; Photo Production
Manager: Jason Allen; Senior Art Manager: Kelly Hendren; Illustrations: © Human Kinetics,
unless otherwise noted; Printer: Sheridan Books
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book
excerpts can also be created to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human
Kinetics.
--- PAGE 6 ---
Printed in the United States of America        10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
The paper in this book is certified under a sustainable forestry program.
Human Kinetics
1607 N. Market Street
Champaign, IL 61820
USA
United States and International
Website: US.HumanKinetics.com
Email: info@hkusa.com
Phone: 1-800-747-4457
Canada
Website: Canada.HumanKinetics.com
Email: info@hkcanada.com
E8306
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 7 ---
 
Dedication
It is with great honor that I dedicate this book to my wife, Nancy. She is my
best friend; my most appreciated person in the world; and the mother of our
two beautiful daughters, Audra and Sarah.
Nancy and I traveled the world together, met royalty, and jumped off a
moving train together in Thailand. During these many exciting times,
Nancy won 10 New England Championship titles, qualified for two
Olympic trials, twice dealt with breast cancer, faced the horrors of PTSD,
and went on to become a practicing registered nurse. Everyone Nancy
meets has nothing but kind words about my most compassionate wife.
Daniels’ Running Formula provides some of the foundations of
successful running, but without Nancy by my side, none of this book would
be possible. Any recognition of my success, including being named World’s
Best Coach by Runner’s World, does not give due credit to what Nancy
provided in terms of my achievements. My many years of coaching success
—with Nike, State University of New York at Cortland, Brevard College,
and Wells College—were clearly the result of having Nancy by my side.
Nancy was the heart and soul of all these teams and individual runners.
Being an elite runner herself, with a compassionate heart for others, always
allowed her to appropriately evaluate different running events and course
and weather conditions. Indispensable (to me and to our teams’ success) is
the word that comes to mind in describing my talented and wonderful wife,
Nancy.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 8 ---
 
Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments
Part I    Understanding the Formula for
Training
  Chapter 1    Essentials of Running Success
  Chapter 2    Training Principles and Tips
  Chapter 3    Physiological and Personal
Training Profiles
  Chapter 4    Types of Training and Intensities
  Chapter 5    VDOT System of Training
  Chapter 6    Environment- and Altitude-
Specific Training
  Chapter 7    Treadmill Training
  Chapter 8    Fitness Training
--- PAGE 9 ---
  Chapter 9    Training Breaks and
Supplemental Training
Part II   Applying the Formula to
Competitive Events
Chapter 10    Season-Tailored Training
Chapter 11    800 Meters
Chapter 12    1,500 Meters to 2 Miles
Chapter 13    5K and 10K
Chapter 14    Cross Country
Chapter 15    15K to 30K
Chapter 16    Marathon
Chapter 17    Ultradistance
Chapter 18    Triathlon
Appendix: Time and Pace Conversions
Glossary
Index
About the Author
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 10 ---
 
Preface
The first edition of Daniels’ Running Formula was published in 1998, and I
have learned a great deal about running and runners since then. You might
find it strange that after so many years of study and coaching, I keep finding
new, more practical, and often simpler ways of prescribing training and
racing programs, but it’s true. I remain inspired by the many runners and
coaches who so often contact me to say they used many of my training
ideas with considerable success and encourage me to continue to look for
new ideas and simpler ways to improve their fitness and performance. And I
want to pass on these new ideas and show you how I’ve improved on
several aspects, even since the third edition of my book.
It has been an interesting journey working with and researching elite
(and some not-so-elite) runners over the years. Although we tend to go
through phases of what is considered the best approach to improved
performance, it all boils down to following some basic principles, trying to
adjust training to meet individual needs, and prescribing training that is
productive yet minimizes the chances of injury. I have always tried to
emphasize the importance of consistency in training and to produce the
greatest benefit from the least amount of training stress rather than
assuming there will be better results by imposing the greatest amount of
stress.
We tend to think that particular groups of runners in the world have
inherent physiological or biomechanical advantages over other groups of
runners, but it is hard to separate the physiological and biomechanical
differences from the psychological or sociological differences that may
exist. For example, in some lesser-developed societies, winning a race can
bring national or even worldwide attention to a runner, and younger runners
--- PAGE 11 ---
in that society are encouraged to follow that pathway to personal
recognition and financial benefits.
No one has all the answers as to how best to train, and there is no single
system that works best for everyone. What I always aim to do in my books
on running is to present scientific information in a manner that both coaches
and athletes can appreciate and use. Then they can decide whether the
knowledge and the training and racing programs provided in the pages that
follow have a positive impact on them, the runners and running coaches.
I felt it was important to once again include what I refer to as the basic
laws of running, many of which can also be used by runners to better
prepare for races or to help teammates perform better. Although my
coaching has extended to a variety of athletes in track and field, cross
country, triathlon, and ultraevents, I still feel most qualified to present what
I think to be the best approach to training for or coaching middle- and long-
distance running events.
This edition organizes the chapters into two parts. The first part presents
training information, considerations, and options that can contribute to the
success of all runners. The second part is geared more for those who
participate in competitions and will benefit from training advice and
programs specific to their events and distances. Chapters are sequenced to
build on previous content. Each new chapter can offer ways to apply what
you learned in the earlier chapters to develop an overall plan of running
success.
Chapter 1 presents what I believe are the ingredients of success (ability,
motivation, opportunity, and direction) and also includes my laws of
running that I mentioned earlier.
Chapter 2 covers the key principles of training. Too often coaches and
runners build a training program based on the workouts of a current
national champion, world-record holder, or Olympian without
understanding why those people achieved their success, which was by
adhering to important principles of training, including how the body reacts
to stress and the benefits of various types of training.
Chapter 3 delves into what I refer to as physiological profiles,
specifically aerobic and lactate profiles. This information is useful for
--- PAGE 12 ---
understanding the relationships between the intensity (speed) at which a
person runs and the demands that changes in stress impose on some systems
of the body.
Chapter 4 covers the various types of training available to runners and
what each type of training is designed to accomplish. You should always be
able to answer this very simple question: “What is the purpose of this
workout?” Although many runners use various types of training—
repetitions, intervals, threshold running, and easy prolonged runs, few are
really certain of how the body responds to each.
Chapter 5 gets into the details of the VDOT system, which has proven to
be so useful in setting training paces for all types of running. A new aspect
of the VDOT system is to show runners of all ages (from 6 years to 50 years
and beyond) how they compare with runners in what is regarded as the
optimal age range for top performance.
Chapter 6 addresses all the things to consider and adapt to when training
and racing in different environments, including altitude and heat and cold.
Chapter 7 provides the information that runners who use treadmills need
to get the most out of that mode of training.
Chapter 8 offers multilevel training options for fitness: a basic program
(the white plan) for novice runners, red and blue plans for experienced
runners, and a gold training schedule for those who fit into the elite
category. The information presented in this chapter can certainly apply to
people who want to use running as a way to achieve better health and
fitness and may or may not decide to enter running events during the year.
Chapter 9 provides helpful insights for returning to training after time
off, whether as a result of injury, illness, or a simple decision to take a
planned break. The chapter also includes useful exercises and shorter,
special types of runs to supplement training.
Chapter 10 starts off part II and the competition-oriented section of the
book with advice for establishing a season plan of training, which involves
different phases and what to include in each phase.
Chapter 11 provides details of various workouts designed specifically for
runners who are concentrating on racing the 800-meter event during track
--- PAGE 13 ---
season. The anaerobic aspect of racing the 800 dictates that training should
put considerable emphasis on anaerobic workouts.
Chapter 12 focuses on training for and racing distances from 1,500
meters to 2 miles. Runners who prefer these race distances need some of the
types of training used by 800 specialists as well as what provides longer-
distance specialists with their strength and ideal preparation.
Chapter 13 presents training needs for runners who select the 5K and
10K distances as their favorites. These race distances are very demanding in
terms of intensity and endurance and typically require a high degree of
concentration during both training and racing.
Chapter 14 covers cross country running, a type of training that applies
to many runners who specialize in shorter events during track season. In
fact, it is often during a cross country season that many runners decide what
distance they will concentrate on in the coming track season.
Chapter 15 is designed to prepare runners for a half marathon and road
races of medium-long distances. These events are typically longer than
most track events and usually require more concentration on mileage and on
training that builds endurance, with less emphasis on repetition (speed)
training.
Chapter 16 gets into considerable detail about marathon training.
Included are programs designed for raw beginners and those who are
interested in just finishing a marathon. Among the many advanced
marathon programs, some emphasize more mileage than others and some
deal with a variety of quality sessions. The marathon programs presented in
chapter 16 are considerably more detailed than those found in most
suggested training plans.
Chapter 17 discusses training for ultraevents, with special input by
Magdalena Lewy-Boulet, who has become very successful in such races
after making it to the Olympics in the marathon, when I was her coach.
Chapter 18 is set aside for the discussion of training for a triathlon,
something that many runners turn to after some years of just running. I
draw from my years of training for modern pentathlon to evaluate the needs
of triathletes.
--- PAGE 14 ---
I truly enjoy helping relative beginners improve as much as I enjoy
seeing one of my elite runners make it to the Olympic Games. I am a firm
believer that the experience of the journey is much greater importance than
any sense of accomplishment that may be realized at the end of the journey.
I hope this new edition of Daniels’ Running Formula will in some way
improve your own journey and make each training run and race a bit more
enjoyable and successful.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 15 ---
 
Acknowledgments
I continue to learn from other coaches and many runners of a variety of
running events and who are at different ages in their successful careers. In
my 60 years of coaching and teaching (and I see coaching as teaching), I
have been very fortunate in terms of outstanding mentors, students, and
athletes with whom I have spent time and continue to spend time.
It’s not possible to list all the people who have helped me during my
years of teaching and coaching, but a few made such an impact on my
learning that I again want to say thanks to them by name. Thanks to Dr.
Bruno Balke, who was my major professor during doctoral studies. We also
worked together in the Federal Aviation Administration and during many
altitude-research studies in the years leading up to the 1968 Mexico City
Olympics. I was especially lucky to get to study one year at the Royal
Gymnastic Central Institute in Stockholm, Sweden, where I was taught by,
and became friends with, Dr. Per-Olof Åstrand, one of the world’s greatest
in exercise physiology and in promoting fitness for humans everywhere.
In my years of research involving elite runners, many gave freely of their
time and allowed me to run numerous tests on them, and I would like to
mention those who seemed to always be there when needed. These elite
include Jim Ryun, Tom Von Ruden, Chris McCubbins, Joan Benoit, John
Mason, Tom Heinonen, Oscar Moore, Dave Chisholm, Conrad Nightingale,
and numerous Athletics West and Nike Farm Team runners.
Twenty-six elite runners, including those just mentioned, let me test
them in 1968, again in 1993, and a third time in 2013 for a 45-year
longitudinal study, possibly the longest study ever conducted on elite
distance runners, and it certainly brought out some interesting results that
were published in a scientific journal.
--- PAGE 16 ---
I have also been honored to coach some outstanding runners over the
years. A coach can’t help but learn from the athletes who become
particularly successful, and some of note include Penny Werthner
(Canadian 1,500 Olympian); Ken Martin and Jerry Lawson (both 2:09
marathon runners); Lisa Martin and Magdalena Lewy-Boulet (both
Olympic marathoners, with times of 2:24 and 2:26); Peter Gilmore and
Jeffrey Eggleston (both 2:12 marathon runners); and Janet Cherobon-
Bawcom, who ran the 10K for the United States in the 2012 London
Olympics.
Special thanks to the many collegiate runners I got to coach during my
17 years at SUNY Cortland, because it is seeing young collegiate runners
improve that reinforces the notion that what you are doing as a coach really
does work. Special thanks to Vicki Mitchell, who went from being a 2:39
high school 800 runner to winning seven NCAA Division III national track
and cross country titles and the 10K at Penn Relays in 33:01, with a final
800 of 2:31 (new 800 PR).
I also would like to thank Carl Foster for his longtime support related to
research, and Jimmy Gilbert for the tremendous time and effort he put into
converting my running research data into the rather popular VDOT tables
that have become useful in setting training paces for runners of all ability
levels. I should also mention that Gilbert started counting his running
mileage after graduating from college and over the next 50 years, he
averaged 38.6 miles (62 km) per week to accumulate over 100,000 miles
(160,934 km) in that time period. Thanks to Bob Sevene, Vin Lananna, and
Frank Gagliano for letting me watch them work with athletes at the elite
level, and thanks to Brian Rosetti and other Run SMART Project workers
who have made our training workout recommendations so very successful.
Words of thanks also go to Anthony Gallo (now Doctor Gallo), the Black
Cactus (Abdi Abdirahman), and Anthony Famiglietti (Fam), who became
good friends and also became close friends of my wife and daughters. All
those mentioned here have played a role in my coaching success and many
still do—thanks to them all.
Finally, special thanks go to my wife, Nancy Jo, and my two wonderful
daughters. Nancy was a very successful runner, winning numerous New
--- PAGE 17 ---
England College Championships and qualifying for the USA Olympic
Trials in both the 1,500 and marathon. Daughters Audra and Sarah have
always been and still are at my side. Audra has completed a marathon, a
triathlon, and a 100-mile (160 km) bike ride. Sarah, although also a fast
runner, has gone the route of music and sings opera in New York City.
These remarkable three ladies have certainly made, and still make, my life a
very enjoyable one.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 18 ---
 
--- PAGE 19 ---
Part I
Understanding the Formula for
Training
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 20 ---
 
--- PAGE 21 ---
Chapter 1
Essentials of Running Success
Everyone should take advantage of the abilities
they have.
The four basic ingredients of success I have always referred to will
determine how successful any person will be as a runner. These ingredients
are, in their order of importance, inherent ability, intrinsic motivation,
opportunity, and direction. I think of inherent ability as most important
because it is something a person is born with; you don’t really have any
control over how tall you will be or the design of your cardiovascular
system, and some people are just built for running. Intrinsic motivation
reflects a person’s desire to follow any particular athletic pursuit, and
without this ingredient, even a very talented person may not reach true
potential. Opportunity varies a great deal and may depend on something as
simple as where you live or how what you want to do is influenced by
others around you, and direction may involve personal contact with a coach,
teacher, or even just something that you read about in a magazine or book.
The more time I have spent coaching (in person, or by contact with runners
via email, phone, or social media), the more I have realized how important
each of these ingredients is in determining success in any running event.
INHERENT ABILITY
Wherever you look in any sporting arena, it is usually quite clear how
important the genetic factor (inherent ability) is in determining which
athletes are most successful. Just for a moment think about how you
envision a female gymnast, a center in basketball, a shot-putter, or a jockey.
Without a doubt you envision a slightly built girl, a tall person, a powerful
person, and a lightweight man or woman. These are the necessary body
--- PAGE 22 ---
builds for high levels of success in these particular sports, and these body
types are not achieved through training. These people were born with these
body types.
Now think of an ideal distance runner. The image you have may vary a
bit depending on who the current champion or record holder is, and
certainly there are successful runners who are tall or short or lean or
muscular. The variation is considerable in terms of anatomical design, but
physiologically and biomechanically the better runners have things in
common; these may include how far from a joint a muscle tendon is
attached and the efficiency of the cardiovascular system, based on heart size
and cardiac output.
Because a good deal of what makes a great runner is not outwardly
obvious, it is not as easy to see who is designed to be a great distance
runner as it is to see who has potential as an Olympic gymnast or shot-put
specialist. In fact, there might be two runners on a team who are the same
height and same weight, who eat and sleep well, and who follow the same
training program, but one beats the other by 30 seconds in a mile race
because of unseen physiological or biomechanical (or even psychological)
factors. A factor that can greatly affect performance is how much oxygen
the blood is carrying with each liter of blood delivered. Hemoglobin (the
substance that carries oxygen to the exercising muscles) levels can vary
considerably among runners, and I have seen more than a minute of
difference in 5K race times associated with relatively small differences in
hemoglobin levels.
It is clear that not all body types have an equal chance of success in
particular sports. This is clearly demonstrated in the Olympic Games and
the need for weight classes in boxing, wrestling, weightlifting, and so on. If
you are a boxing enthusiast and are 5 feet 5 inches (1.6 m) tall and weigh
115 pounds (52 kg), how would you like to be matched against a 265
pounder (120 kg) who is 6 feet 6 inches (2 m) tall? That could be the reality
if we didn’t recognize inherent differences in people.
--- PAGE 23 ---
INTRINSIC MOTIVATION
The second ingredient of success is intrinsic motivation, the desire a person
has within to achieve success in running. It is important to differentiate
between the motivation someone else has for you and the motivation you
have within yourself to be a successful runner. Motivation that someone
else may have for you to achieve success as a runner may be positive or
negative, and I certainly hope it is positive if that person is your coach. It is
easy for a high school running coach to be highly motivated for an ideally
designed runner who transfers into his or her school, but if this runner is
more interested in being a successful artist or piano player, success as a
runner may not be as great as the coach anticipates.
--- PAGE 24 ---
Among the greatest middle-distance runners of all-time, Jim Ryun (shown here on the left racing
against Marty Liquori) demonstrated his running ability and drive to excel early in his career. He was
the first high school runner to break the 4-minute barrier in the mile.
In terms of the people who select running as a sport to pursue and the
first two ingredients of success (ability and motivation), runners fall into
four categories:
1. Those with great ability and high motivation to use their outstanding
ability
2. Those with outstanding inherent ability and little or no motivation to
pursue the sport of running, for which they are nicely designed to be
successful
--- PAGE 25 ---
3. Those with little ability for running and high intrinsic motivation to
achieve success as a runner
4. Those with little running ability and no interest in running
We can quickly eliminate considering the fourth group because they will
not show interest in running and will not come out for the team. I call them
no-shows. The first group of runners are champions because they are not
only nicely designed for running in terms of biomechanical and
physiological features, but they also have the necessary motivation either
because of their interest in following a current champion or need to satisfy
the desire to outperform others in the same age group.
Those in group two may be best referred to as coach frustrators because
the coach sees their ability, but desire is lacking on the part of the athletes.
Sometimes a coach will yell at some type twos to “give it your all,” or “let’s
get going,” or some other outlandish comment that probably will go further
in driving these people away from the sport than it will to get them excited
about running.
The runners in group two should not be yelled at by a coach who wants
them to do better or for not having the motivation the coach believes they
should have. My attitude about dealing with any runner under my wing is to
provide an environment in which each runner’s ability and potential will be
realized. Coaches need to provide an encouraging environment for their
runners, not a discouraging one. The way I try to develop an encouraging
environment is to follow the basic laws of running, which are detailed later
in this chapter. I have found that runners who are treated with respect and as
individuals rather than as just part of a group of runners will realize
constant improvement and find they are often meeting their personal
running goals. Each runner needs to be positively recognized for every
improvement that is realized. I much prefer concentrating on individual
improvement rather than always comparing one runner with how others are
doing.
Over the past several years I have asked high school runners, whom I run
into at camps, to answer one question for me: “Why did you take up the
sport of running?” They can choose one of four answers:
1. I wanted to get in shape for another sport.
--- PAGE 26 ---
2. I got cut from another sport.
3. Someone pushed me or encouraged me to do it.
4. I wanted to be a runner.
In general, the fourth answer applies to only about 12 percent of those
who are pursuing running in a typical high school program. This is a sad
situation because it indicates that running is not something many youngsters
want to try, and our school system is so lacking in physical education that
the kids with natural ability don’t get the chance to be seen running or to
realize they have a talent for the sport. Even worse, running is often used as
a punishment. It is not unusual to hear a team sport coach tell a player who
doesn’t perform properly to “give me a lap.”
A thoughtful coach can go a long way in instilling motivation in a group
two athlete who is highly motivated to do something other than run, and it
may also be the coach’s job to encourage the person to put more time and
effort into whatever future life he is motivated to pursue. A thoughtful
coach may even help a talented but not-so-motivated runner become more
interested in pursuing the sport. This can happen in several ways, but one
thing I focus on is asking my runners to feel the workouts and to feel the
same workout getting easier before increasing training stress. When so
much focus is placed on increasing training stress to increase fitness,
running can become too stressful.
As for those in group three, there are cases of people who were not very
good at the high school level yet went on to make an Olympic team. One of
the subjects in a research project I conducted had a best high school mile of
4:34, and this runner went on to set a world record in an indoor, middle-
distance event and also to place ninth in the Olympic 1,500. One of my
runners couldn’t make the top seven on our team until her junior year of
college, but she went on to win seven national collegiate titles and the Penn
Relays in the 10K the year after she graduated.
Runners experience success at a variety of times in their careers, and a
thoughtful coach can point out positive facts about progressing as a runner.
The fact that some runners progress rather quickly should not discourage
those who are taking longer to progress. Every runner should have short-
term and long-term goals to shoot for.
--- PAGE 27 ---
In terms of the runners who fit in group three (lacking in ability but high
in motivation), I’ll take a team of them any day. They may be frustrated
with their performances, but they are fun to have on a team and will usually
be very supportive of teammates. They will also do anything the coach says.
The negative side is they will do whatever is asked of them and will want to
do even more, and it is often the coach’s job to hold them back so they
don’t get hurt instead of letting them do extra training. A good approach to
avoid overtraining is to always stick with the same amount and intensity of
training for about four weeks before demanding or taking on more. Let the
body adjust to one level of stress before introducing a harder stress.
Regardless of the types of runners a coach has, the coach needs to treat
everyone as an individual, a person with various strengths and weaknesses.
The goal is to teach each runner to be an optimist, someone who
internalizes good things and externalizes unfortunate things.
OPPORTUNITY
Opportunity shows itself in many ways: weather and facilities, training and
competing with or against others, and personal financial situations.
Certainly, if you have a strong desire and the ability to pursue downhill
skiing but you live in a warm climate where it never snows, chances of
success are limited. Not every part of the country has a swimming pool or
even a body of water where a potential swimmer might develop into a
champion.
Fortunately for runners, running is available to just about anyone in just
about any climate and any type of terrain. In fact, one person I coached for
a number of years by mail was serving seven years in a state prison and was
able to average about 40 miles (65 km) a week in the prison yard training
for a marathon that he ran with his sister upon release.
Opportunity in some sports can be related to how much money a person
has available. Equestrian events require access to horses, and sailing
requires a boat and water where the boat can be used. Having access to a
golf course may require a costly membership in a country club, and being
able to play tennis regularly may also be determined by finances. But you
certainly don’t need a lot of money to pursue running as a sport. Some
--- PAGE 28 ---
runners do very well training on their own and often surprise competitors
when they seemingly come from nowhere to win a race or two.
No doubt some people have better opportunities to train for running
events than do others. Some who live in areas of cold winter weather have
access to an indoor facility or a treadmill when running outside is rather
difficult. The same could be said for residents of very hot summer climates;
a relatively cool indoor facility could be a lifesaver.
When I lived in Sweden and trained outside through some rough winter
conditions, I used to enjoy running by myself and often wondered if others,
many of whom had nicer weather conditions, would be willing or able to
put up with the less-than-ideal conditions. It is very possible that lacking an
opportunity strengthens some runners’ dedication to their sport.
One might ask why we in the United States, with every imaginable
climate and terrain available for training, do not dominate running around
the world. My answer to that is simple: We lack the type of physical
education in our school systems that would help identify talented runners,
and running is not promoted in the United States like other sports. With
regular physical education in our school systems, more potential runners are
likely to be spotted while running around playing a variety of games. Also,
many of our youngsters see sports only on television, which is usually
dominated by football, hockey, basketball, soccer, and baseball, and those
are the sports these young ones imagine themselves participating in. If
children never witness great runners, why should they be interested in
becoming one?
In the United States, most young runners are attended to in the school
systems rather than in clubs, as is more popular in many other countries.
Being part of a school team has advantages and disadvantages. One
potential disadvantage is that runners may be exposed to several coaches
while going through many years of school. There may be a middle school
coach, then a high school coach (sometimes even a different coach for cross
country and track during the same academic year), followed by a college
coach (or two).
Having multiple coaches can sometimes work out, but often the runner
gets different approaches to how best to train and even how best to run a
--- PAGE 29 ---
race. For example, some coaches may be very scientific in their approach,
and others use minimal science in their training but may have such a good
relationship with, and understanding of, the runners that science is not
needed. The best a runner can do is hope that each new coach will provide
some little idea that fills a gap in the overall training program. For a coach
who has to work with runners influenced by a variety of training
philosophies, it’s best to determine what each runner has been subjected to
in order to understand which techniques to apply. Having a variety of
coaches can minimize the opportunity for a sound, continuous training
program.
DIRECTION
The ingredient of direction refers to a coach or teacher or training plan to
follow, and I tend to list direction as the last and possibly least important of
my four ingredients of success. Why is direction least important? Because
you can have no direction, some degree of direction, or direction that is
worse than none. For example, let’s say a runner asks me to coach him for
the marathon. My first question would be “How much running have you
been doing recently?” If the response is “I haven’t been running,” then I
would ask, “What running have you done in your life up to this time?” If
the response to this question is “I have never run,” then I would ask, “What
sports have you done in your life?” Now if the answer to this is “I have
never done sports,” then I might say something like, “Starting right now, I
want you to run 150 miles (241 km) each week.” Clearly, that would be a
negative response, worse than no response or no direction. Just because I
have coached several marathon runners who do or have run 150 miles a
week certainly doesn’t mean I should impose that amount of stress on a raw
beginner.
A positive coaching approach is definitely more desirable from the
athlete’s point of view (and often even from the coach’s point of view).
Saying that progress is being made even when it doesn’t seem to be the case
will go a long way toward improving a runner’s attitude about training. I’ve
often had success by emphasizing progress over a longer period of time; for
example, I might tell a runner it would be nice to see a certain amount of
--- PAGE 30 ---
improvement over the next couple of years rather than insisting on
improvement in every season of every year. Some runners progress rapidly
and others not so rapidly; understanding and positive thinking can provide a
desirable environment for runners.
An informed and caring coach can inspire, teach, and challenge young athletes to become distance
runners and can increase their enjoyment of, success in, and dedication to the sport.
When I think of all the great runners I have known who suffered through
a tough coach–athlete relationship, it amazes me that some of them ever
reached high levels of success, and certainly some probably didn’t do as
well as they might have with more reasonable direction.
It is sometimes difficult to make a true evaluation of a coach because
assessment is typically based on the performances turned in by the athletes.
Further, in the U.S. collegiate system, success is often based more on a
coach’s ability to recruit athletes than on how much those athletes improve
while in the program. If the term coach refers to the person who directs the
improvement or refinement of running performance, then a good coach can
always answer the questions “What is the purpose of this workout” and
“Why are we doing this workout today?” A good coach produces beneficial
reactions to training, creates positive race results, and transforms the
--- PAGE 31 ---
athletes she brings into the program into better runners and better human
beings.
Talented athletes who have motivation and opportunity can often
perform well enough to mask the job being done by a not-so-great coach.
On the other side of the coin, truly great coaches may be overlooked as a
result of not having much to work with in terms of ability and motivation,
but their day will come.
In addition, it’s important that coaches always be available to their
runners. Coaches need to care for their athletes as people first and then as
runners. When I talk to my college runners at the beginning of each new
season, I say something like, “First you are a person, second you are a
student, and third you are a runner—and don’t ever rearrange that order of
importance while you are in school.”
What coaches often tend to overlook is the importance of giving positive
individual attention to each athlete on the team. Nothing can replace
encouraging comments or understanding words from a coach. To become
an elite runner, a person needs a support system, and this support system
must have the athlete’s best interests in mind.
DANIELS’ BASIC LAWS OF RUNNING
In addition to the important ingredients of success in running, I have come
up with what I call basic laws of running. I have designed these laws in
hopes of allowing runners of all levels of achievement to be able to
optimize the benefits of training. Because runners respond differently to a
particular coaching treatment, training program, or environment, these basic
laws help evaluate and enhance individual training situations.
1. Every runner has specific individual abilities.
Each runner has unique strengths and weaknesses. Some runners have a
desirable muscle fiber design, with a high fraction of slow-twitch endurance
fibers, which leads to a high aerobic power output (high 
O2max). On the
other hand, another runner who does not have a particularly high 
O2max
may have outstanding running economy because of ideal mechanics. I think
that runners should spend a good deal of their training time trying to
--- PAGE 32 ---
improve known weaknesses, but when approaching important races, the
main emphasis should be taking advantage of known strengths. For
example, a runner who feels weak in the area of speed but great in
endurance should spend early and even midseason time working on
improving speed, but in the latter weeks of training, put more emphasis on
endurance to take advantage of what works best for this individual.
2. A runner’s focus must stay positive.
Do not dwell on the negative; try to find positives in all training sessions.
For example, if a runner says after a workout that her run didn’t feel very
good, it would not be wise for a coach, teammate, or training partner to say,
“You sure looked bad running today.” A better approach is to find
something good to refer to, such as “Sorry you weren’t feeling great today,
but your arm carriage looked like what you’ve been working toward.”
3. Expect ups and downs; some days are better than others.
Even world-record holders and Olympic champions have occasional off
racing days. Usually the longer the race distance, the less desirable it is to
run a race when not feeling well. For example, you will need more time to
recover from a marathon that you felt poor running than a 5K. I certainly
would recommend even dropping out of a race when not feeling well, as
opposed to struggling through a race knowing it will have to be some time
before you are able to run well again.
4. Be flexible in training to allow for the unexpected.
Switch training days to accommodate unusual weather, for example. If you
have a workout scheduled for Monday, and Monday’s weather is cold rain
and high winds and Tuesday’s weather is predicted to be much nicer, put
Monday’s workout off until Tuesday.
5. Set intermediate goals.
These goals pave the way to long-term goals. Long-term goals are
important to have but may take years to achieve, so it is crucial to have
smaller, more achievable goals along the way. I like to have my runners set
goals for most races they run, and it sure is nice if the goals you set are
fairly easy to achieve. For example, a goal for today’s race may be to start
--- PAGE 33 ---
the race with a slower pace and see how many other runners you can pass
during the race. Or maybe try a different warm-up for this race. It is
possible to learn from mistakes as well as from success.
6. Concentrate on the task at hand.
Runners need to learn to focus on what they are doing and not spend too
much time worrying about others. If you carry out your own plan to the best
of your ability and get beaten by a few others, you just accept the fact that
those others had a better day than you did. Your job now is to reflect on the
event, and in your mind consider what you might do differently if you were
to run that same race over again. We learn from losing just as often as (or
maybe more often than) we learn from winning.
7. Most mistakes in races are made early in the race.
So often, especially in races that involve younger runners, the typical race
sees the best runner go out too fast, and eventually slow considerably.
However, the rest of the pack went with this too-fast leader and for them it
was an even greater initial stress, and they all died worse than did the leader
who still won and assumes that is the way to victory. The day that one of
the third- or fourth-best runners in the pack takes a more evenly paced
approach to the race is the day the best runner will be beaten.
8. Training should be rewarding.
It’s not always fun, but it should always be rewarding. Sometimes a
particular workout may not feel so great, but if you understand the purpose
of each workout, it is more likely that you will understand that progress is
being made—and that is certainly rewarding. You should learn something
useful from any race or workout you finish.
9. Eat and sleep well.
Rest and good nutrition are parts of training, not things that are done
outside of training. I heard of a male runner whose wife gave birth to their
first child at 5:00 a.m. and the father did not sleep one hour that night. Later
that day the new father broke a world record in his event. I imagine his
regular routine involved good sleep habits. Look at it this way: If you
regularly eat and sleep well, one bad meal or poor night’s sleep will not
--- PAGE 34 ---
have a negative effect on you. Also, if you regularly eat poorly or seldom
sleep enough, one good meal or good night’s sleep won’t help much.
10. Don’t train when sick or injured.
Not following this law often leads to a more prolonged setback than if
you’d taken a few days off to recover from an illness or injury.
11. Chronic health issues should be checked by a professional.
Feeling below par now and then is not so bad, but feeling consistently out
of sorts is usually related to something that needs medical attention.
12. A good run or race is never a fluke.
Sometimes a bad run is a fluke, but if you do run a great race, it is because
you are capable of doing it.
Keep these basic laws in mind throughout the training and racing
process. Being able to keep training balanced, maintain a positive outlook,
and set reasonable and achievable goals will lead to running success.
From a runner’s standpoint, consistency in training is the single most
important thing that leads to success. That consistency comes from
concentrating on the task at hand—neither dwelling on the past nor looking
too far forward. The only thing you can control is the present, and when you
focus on that and remain consistent in your training, you’ll find your
greatest success.
The way to take advantage of these basic laws of running is to make
them part of your everyday life as a runner. Over time, runners shouldn’t
have to think about how they are treating themselves; following these laws
becomes a part of daily life, and race results will reflect this benefit. On the
other hand, not following these laws can lead to disappointment in running
performance and even poor relationships with other runners.
Athletes can’t be sorted into clear-cut categories. Different amounts and
combinations of my four ingredients of success are what give runners their
individuality. Whether you are a runner or a coach, be happy with what you
have, and use the ability you do have to its fullest. I discuss training basics
in chapter 2, but don’t be afraid to make changes now and then when you
are experiencing success with some alterations I offer. There are as many
--- PAGE 35 ---
individual pathways to success as there are individuals, and discovering
what works best for each person is what makes running so exciting and fun.
Periodically reviewing the basic laws of running can remind runners of
important aspects of training and racing and also can be helpful in avoiding
the negative effects of overtraining and not taking care of the body.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 36 ---
 
--- PAGE 37 ---
Chapter 2
Training Principles and Tips
Eat well, rest often, and maintain a good state of
hydration.
What type of training plan do most runners follow? Or maybe the question
should be how do most runners train? Often a coach coaches as she was
coached, which is not so unusual because many coaches go from being an
athlete to being a coach. Some runners and coaches study psychology or
biomechanics or physiology, and this provides scientific background for the
practical experiences they had as athletes. Still, it is not unusual to train the
way a champion athlete was coached or trained. So, copying what others
have done is certainly not uncommon. The question is do runners always
understand why they are doing what they are doing?
No question, some runners train on their own and others are given
workouts by coaches, which can vary considerably and still be productive.
There is probably no particular way of training that is best for every runner;
however, there are certainly basic principles that can improve different
bodily functions. No doubt that with enough runners on a team, just about
any training system will reap positive results, even if only for part of the
team involved. My concern in this case is that some who didn’t survive a
particular training system may have been even better than those who did if
they hadn’t been driven out of the sport by injury or a perceived lack of
commitment.
In this chapter I will present several topics on training and technique
development, including eight significant training principles, how to develop
a training plan, proper stride mechanics, and the importance of breathing
rhythms. It is always important to understand how each training component
adds to the entire training program and overall fitness.
--- PAGE 38 ---
EXTREME APPROACHES TO
TRAINING
As a modern pentathlete, the first running coach I ever had was our fencing
master; he was a great fencing master, but he was not very skilled at
coaching runners. As a newcomer to running, I did what he said and
assumed it was how runners trained.
The first 6 weeks I ran for this coach, I ran a mile warm-up followed by
10 repeat 400s on a cinder track in spikes. Each 400 was about as hard as I
could go (trying to keep up with others who knew how to run). I got a 400
jog for recovery between the harder 400s. I did this 5 days a week for 6
weeks. Now, if the purpose of this workout was to produce pain and injury,
it was just right. I got such painful shins I didn’t know which foot to stand
on.
Another negative result of this daily set of hard 400s was that no one
bothered to tell me how to run a race that was 4,000 meters in distance, so
knowing nothing but all-out running, that’s how I ran my 4K races—all out
right at the start. Naturally, after about 800 meters I was already in a death
trot for the remainder of the event. Not a really great approach.
We often hear about the training that great runners do and assume that is
a good approach. Here is what one 17-year-old runner did one week in the
spring of his junior year in high school. Sunday was a 10-mile (16 km) run
in 64 minutes, and his only run on Sunday. Each of the other 6 days of
every week involved a morning 4-mile (6.4 km) run and then an afternoon
session on the track. This week in April I am referring to had the following
afternoon workouts:
Monday: 9:55 2 mile + 2 × 5:15 miles + 3 × 2:28 800s + 6 × 65 sec
400s + weights and a 4-mile cool-down
Tuesday: 6 × 400 at 64 sec each + 10 × 140 at 18 sec each + 5 × 200 at
31 sec each
Wednesday: 50 × 400 at 69 sec each on a 3-minute send-off
Thursday: 18 × 800 at 2:45 each (why not just a 9-mile run at 5:30 per
mile pace?)
--- PAGE 39 ---
Friday: 1 mile + 1,200 + 800 + 600 + 400 + 3 miles easy cool-down
Saturday: race
I guess this is how we should train our middle-distance runners because
this runner broke several world records and made it to three Olympics. One
day I asked the coach of this runner if he had others on the team who ran
those 50 400s, and he said 24 of them did and one ran only 40, about whom
the coach said, “I knew he was not going to be very good.”
Another national record holder had several 66-mile (106 km) long runs,
totaled 380 miles (611 km) one week, averaged 320 miles (515 km) a week
for 6 weeks, and averaged 240 miles (386 km) a week for one year. I
seriously doubt many runners could do these workouts and live through
them. So what is needed? I’d say we need to follow some principles of
training. I present some reasonable ones here.
PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING
It is a good idea to understand how training affects your body and that
different kinds of training will stress different systems. Every time you
impose a specific stress, there will be immediate reactions in different parts
of your body. Every time you impose that same stress, you get the same
reactions, but over time there is a different reaction to a particular repeated
stress, and that is the body strengthening itself.
The human body is very good at adapting to a variety of stresses, but it
takes a fair amount of time for the body to fully react to some types of
stress (e.g., it takes months for muscle fibers to fully adjust to the stress of
regular running). It is important to understand different principles of
training so you can take advantage of them and avoid overstressing the
body with amount, intensity, or frequency of training.
Principle 1: The Body Reacts to Stress
Regardless of what running event you decide to engage in, it is worthwhile
to learn a little about how the human body reacts to various types of
physical stress, and believe me it does react. All you have to do to realize
there is always some reaction is to go for a simple run once around the
--- PAGE 40 ---
block or around the track. At the completion of your one-lap run you can
easily recognize some reactions to that stress. Your heart will be beating
faster, you will be breathing a little harder, and you may notice a little
discomfort in some muscles in your legs. If you take your blood pressure,
you will find that it has gone up a little, not to mention that blood flow has
been diverted from some parts of your body to other parts to accommodate
the task you undertook. Your body does a very good job of adjusting to the
stresses placed on it, and you won’t even be aware of many of the
adjustments made.
Principle 2: Specificity
The principle of specificity simply states that the tissues being stressed are
the ones that react to that stress. If you stress your heart muscle, the heart
reacts; if you stress breathing muscles, they react; and if you stress running
muscles in your legs, those muscles will react. Every time you run, or even
walk, some parts of your feet will also react to the stress imposed on them.
In addition to the relatively immediate reactions to physical stress, there
is a second type of reaction. The parts of the body being stressed become
stronger and better prepared to deal with any future stress, as long as the
body is in a state of good health. Stress the heart muscle and the heart
muscle gets stronger; stress your running muscles and they get stronger;
stress the breathing muscles and they get stronger. This response occurs in
all muscles, tendons, bones, and other tissues under stress.
Principle 3: Overstress
More stress leads to more adaptation, but another training basic may also
come into play here: the principle of overstress. If you overstress some
body parts, they may not get tougher; in fact, they may get weaker or break
down completely. This brings up a very important part of the equation.
When does the body accomplish the strengthening part of the stress
reaction? It is during the recovery, or rest time, between bouts of stress that
the strengthening takes place.
Rest and recovery are a vital part of a training program, not an attempt to
avoid training. There may actually be times when you will benefit more
--- PAGE 41 ---
from rest than from going out for another run, and sometimes doing a less
stressful workout will produce more benefits than will a harder session. An
approach I suggest for runners is that whenever you are not sure which of
two training sessions to take on at any particular time, select the less
stressful of the two. You are admitting you aren’t sure which would be
better, so why not eliminate the more demanding one? An example is
deciding whether to do a solid set of interval 1,000-meter runs or a not-so-
demanding fartlek session; the weather is not desirable, including some
heavy winds. Doing the 1,000s will probably be slower than desired
because of the wind, and that can be a bit discouraging. On the other hand,
the fartlek session will not involve trying to hit particular times for specific
distances, and the overall benefit of the session may be as good as having
done the repeat 1,000s for time.
Success in running relies on being able to make adaptations when
necessary, particularly when it comes to coaching a team of young runners.
For example, let’s say a coach says, based on the fact that his star runner,
Bob, has done a similar workout before, “Today I want you all to run eight
repeat 400s in 75 seconds each with a 400-meter jog for recovery. If you
want to run as well as Bob, you need to train like Bob.” So the group goes
out in 75 for the first 400, and as time goes by, Bob keeps running 75s, but
some of the group can’t hold that pace and struggle to run 78, 80, or slower
for some of their 400s. Soon enough, those who can’t keep up are
struggling to run as hard as they can and are not getting as much recovery
time between the faster 400s, and technique goes out the window.
What is the purpose of this workout? Probably to develop speed and
economy, but if most in the group are struggling with poor technique, good
economy is not being practiced, and speed is not developed if the pace
keeps getting slower. So who benefits from the workout? Bob is the only
one who benefits; all the others are just getting negative feedback as to how
well they are progressing.
Coaches and runners must be able to make adjustments to accommodate
each athlete who is there to work out. You never know when the slowest
person on the team may eventually become the best, but it will never
--- PAGE 42 ---
happen if he is discouraged and quits before he realizes his potential or,
worse, is run into the ground and injured so he is not able to run at all.
I feel confident saying that the United States never sends its top runners
to any Olympic Games because some of the best are hurt when it comes
time to pick the team. As far as coaching a cross country team, I would
personally rather have my top seven runners all healthy and a little below
their capability than to have three of them in peak shape and the other four
injured and not even able to start the championship race. It does not make
sense to always strive to produce the top athlete if that ruins the lives of
others who might have eventually become great. What produces the best
result is to have each member of a team performing at her best, regardless
of where on the team each member is ranked.
Reducing stress, be it physical or psychological in nature, is desirable
going into championship events. I have mentioned many times in writings
and talks how Tom Von Ruden, a good friend of mine, asked for my advice
when he was training for the final Olympic trials in South Lake Tahoe in
1968. He told me he was not feeling as ready as he would like to be in the
final few weeks leading up to the trials, and he wondered what I thought he
should do. Who knows if I gave the best answer, but I told him to leave the
training camp and go up to Leadville, Colorado, where he could be by
himself for the final couple of weeks before the trials. He took that advice
and, somewhat unexpectedly, made the U.S. team. He followed that with a
ninth-place finish in the Olympic 1,500. Maybe it was just a matter of
reducing psychological stress, but it certainly paid off.
--- PAGE 43 ---
Though modestly sized for an elite runner, Tom Von Ruden (bib 99) earned respect from the best
runners in the world, whom he often challenged and beat, through his dedication to training and
competitive spirit.
Principle 4: Training Response
Figure 2.1 shows how the body tends to respond to a new stress. Let’s say
you are starting a training program. You are not in great shape but are
capable of running 30 minutes or so during any training session, and you
can run repeated 1-mile runs at 8:00 minutes each without undue stress.
Also, let’s say your current level of fitness at the start of training (which is
more stressful than what you have been doing) is the one depicted in figure
2.1. So you start a program that involves running three 1-mile runs at 8:00
each, with 10 minutes of rest in between. Also, let’s say you do this training
session on 3 days of each week. Because this new training program is more
demanding than what you have been doing, you rise to a new level of
fitness.
--- PAGE 44 ---
Figure 2.1    Increased fitness as a response to a new level of training stress.
The benefit of this new training stress diminishes as time goes by,
however, and eventually, if you just continue doing the same training week
after week, your new fitness level will no longer improve. If, after attaining
the benefits of this training program, which typically takes about 6 to 8
weeks, you want to reach a higher level of fitness, the training stress needs
to be increased again. There are times when some runners will want to hit a
steady state of fitness and not increase the stress until later in the year or
when a new competitive season is fast approaching, but when a new level
of fitness is desired, the training stress has to increase.
In the sport of running, there are several ways to achieve an increase in
stress. Look back at the program you started following in our example—3 ×
1 mile at 8:00 with 10-minute rests, performed 3 days each week. There are
four variables in this program:
Workload, or total amount of work being accomplished, which is 3
miles in this case
Intensity factor, which is a speed of 8:00 for each mile
Recovery, which is 10 minutes after each 8-minute mile being run
Frequency, which in this program is three times each week
--- PAGE 45 ---
All training sessions have at least three of these four components:
workload, intensity, and frequency. Steady runs (i.e., long comfortable runs)
don’t have the recovery factor because the workout involves a single bout
of running. When you feel the need to increase the stress level of the
training program in figure 2.1, you have all four components to work with:
You could increase the workload by increasing the number of 1-
mile runs to four, or some number more than three, and leaving the
other ingredients as they are.
You could leave the workload at 3 miles and increase intensity to
7:40 per mile.
You could keep load and intensity as is and reduce the recovery
time between runs to 5 minutes.
You could leave load, intensity, and recovery as they are and just
increase frequency to 4 or 5 days each week.
Figure 2.2    Increased fitness as a response to new levels of training stress added to prior training
stresses.
It is not a good idea to change more than one of the training variables. A
lot depends on the total mileage currently achieved; the number of repeats
of a particular training distance in a training session should be a function of
weekly mileage. If a runner has a stable weekly mileage, the number of
repeats usually will not be changed; more likely the speed of the repeated
runs will be increased and recovery time held similar to what it was earlier.
Making any of the ingredients of the training session more stressful will
usually result in the body moving up to a new level of fitness, and the
--- PAGE 46 ---
manner in which this improved fitness is achieved is similar to how the first
improvement was achieved—relatively rapidly at first and then tapering off
over a period of weeks. Figure 2.2 shows how new levels of fitness are
attained (or maybe not attained).
Principle 5: Personal Limits
Sometimes an increase in training stress may not result in improved fitness,
and in figure 2.2 I have put a question mark after the third level of
improved fitness, suggesting that imposing a third new stress may not bring
about an increase in fitness. This doesn’t mean a person has reached
optimal fitness, but it does indicate that another principle of training is
coming into play here, namely that everyone has limits. By no means does
this imply that anyone ever reaches her absolute limits, but it certainly does
suggest that everyone has seasonal limits. By seasonal limits I mean limits
that are imposed on a person because of a lifestyle at any given time.
The principle that everyone has limits is most noticeable during college
years because of the variations that occur in class schedules. For example,
during one term of study a student may have a class at 8:00 a.m. every day
of the week, have classes until 2:00 every afternoon, and attend two labs
from 2:15 to 5:15 p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays. The labs may even
prevent the runner from attending practice on Tuesdays and Thursdays, and
training may have to be done alone. Now, the very next college term this
same runner may not have a class until 10:00 a.m. any day of the week and
may not have any labs, with the final class of the day ending at 2:00 p.m.
This certainly is a better schedule for training, with sufficient time for
morning runs and also plenty of time in the afternoons.
Even for runners who are not in college, the demands of daily life can
vary from one season of the year to the next. The demands at work, at
home, and of other things going on at different periods in a person’s life
make training more or less difficult.
Something that should definitely be avoided is overtraining, and the best
way to prevent this negative scenario is to have constant runner–coach
interaction. Training intensities should be determined by current fitness,
which is best measured by race performances. With this in mind, my
--- PAGE 47 ---
standard answer to a runner who thinks his training needs to be speeded up
is “Prove to me in a race that you are ready to train faster.” Of course, when
a runner has been training at a specific intensity for 4 to 6 weeks without
feeling any increase in stress, then, without a race to go by, training can be
increased slightly in intensity.
I have designed a brief stress table that some runners find useful for
tracking life issues (table 2.1). Keeping track of different aspects of daily
life can often help athletes and coaches decide what daily activities and
stresses are associated with good and bad performances, or even what is
associated with variations in how training, or life in general, is going.
--- PAGE 49 ---
In arriving at scores for each item in table 2.1, consider the following:
How desirable was last night’s sleep?
Do you have an injury, an illness, or unusual pains?
How well do you think you recovered from yesterday’s training?
How is your flexibility?
Rate the previous 24 hours of rest, energy, and nutrition.
Rate the physical stress of today’s training session.
How stressful was today, relative to your general mental and
emotional state?
Add any category you would like to include in your daily
evaluations.
Principle 6: Diminishing Return
Two other principles of training often associated with each other are the
principle of diminishing return and the principle of accelerating setbacks,
both of which are depicted in figure 2.3.
Let’s first examine the principle of diminishing return. Here we are
looking at how fitness improves over time. In this case, time may be years
of training, not just several weeks. When you start training, the benefits are
rather substantial relative to the effort put forth. The fitter you get, the less
benefit you get from training harder, which is quite logical if you think
about it.
--- PAGE 50 ---
Figure 2.3    Comparison of an increase in fitness level caused by training with the chance of a
setback caused by the increased stress from training.
For example, as a beginner you may improve your time for a 1-mile race
from 6:10 to 5:40 without training very hard, but a 30-second improvement
from 5:40 to 5:10 will probably be a bit tougher, and improving from 4:30
to 4:00 will certainly take a lot more work than it took to get from 6:10 to
5:40.
Just imagine how much harder you would need to train to improve your
marathon time by 1 minute if you are currently running 2:08 than it would
take to improve 4 minutes, from 3 hours to 2:56. Again, the fitter you
become, the less benefit you get from training harder. Here’s another (and
more appealing) way to put it: The worse your state of fitness, the more
benefit you will reap from training moderately, which is reassuring when
you have lost fitness because of illness or injury.
Principle 7: Accelerating Setbacks
Now that we have looked at the diminishing return curve, let’s look at the
accelerating setback curve, represented by the dashed line in figure 2.3.
This curve shows that when you are not training very hard, there is less
chance of encountering a setback through injury or lack of interest; but at
--- PAGE 51 ---
some point in the training process, as the stress of training increases in
intensity, the chance of a setback starts to increase rather rapidly.
When you consider these two responses to training, most of your training
must be in the gray shading shown in figure 2.3. Within this ideal intensity
zone, there are substantial benefits and relatively minimal chances of being
sidetracked by setbacks.
Bear in mind that it is not possible to assign any particular amount of
stress to this window because that will vary based on training experience.
For example, for one runner this desirable window of training stress may be
30 miles (48 km) per week, and for another runner it may be 120 miles (193
km) per week. What constitutes a proper amount of training depends a great
deal on years of experience and body design, not to mention time available
and commitment to being a successful runner.
Principle 8: Maintenance
The last principle of training is the maintenance principle, which states that
it is easier to maintain a level of fitness than it was to achieve that fitness.
Part of this is a psychological matter because it is typically easier for a
runner to repeat a particular performance than it was to achieve that same
performance in the first place.
For example, if you have been working for some time to race a 5-minute
mile, and you finally make it happen, it won’t be as hard to do it again as it
was to do it the first time. Physiologically, you have increased your fitness
level a notch as well. Your heart has gotten stronger, more blood vessels
have opened up to the running muscles, and the muscle cells themselves
have become more efficient in converting fuel into energy.
Another example of how maintaining fitness is not as hard as it was to
achieve it is seen when you taper for races. During a taper, you back off
some on the training stress and achieve better race results. Being able to
maintain, or even improve, fitness while reducing stress certainly supports
the maintenance principle.
The maintenance principle is particularly important when planning a
long-term training program because it allows you to shift from emphasizing
one type of training to another while still maintaining the benefits of the
--- PAGE 52 ---
previous workouts. For example, you may have been concentrating on
interval training for some weeks and then switched over to more threshold
work and a little less of the interval-type training. The maintenance
principle allows you to keep the benefits you gained from the interval work
as you begin to reap the benefits of threshold training. To help maintain, it
is okay to include some, but less, of the earlier training.
It is also possible to see the maintenance principle at work when a
student has time off between cross country and track seasons. During this
time off from running, an athlete may do supplemental training or may even
play a little basketball or other sport, and the stresses imposed on different
parts of the body can help maintain some conditioning that the earlier
running produced. This is of particular importance for runners who take
time off for injury, for illness, or just to take a break from daily running.
TRAINING PLAN DEVELOPMENT
In discussing these important principles of training, I have shown that there
is no one specific route to success as a runner. Some runners respond better
to one type of training than do others, some are slow to respond to the same
training that others respond to quickly, and it is certainly a good idea to
expose all runners to various approaches during a season of training. You
must always be open to trying different types of training and to arranging
training in different orders of importance throughout a season, but at all
times you should be able to answer the question “What is the purpose of
this workout?”
Several years ago I was asked by some high school coaches how to best
deal with their teams’ racing schedule (every Tuesday and every Saturday
throughout cross country season). The question was, “If we have to race
Tuesday and Saturday every week, when can we train?” My response was
twofold.
First, realize that races are a serious part of training and that there are
definite physiological and psychological benefits achieved from racing. In
addition, when running a 4,000- to 5,000-meter race twice a week, there is
little, if any, need for interval training during this time. In other words, a
--- PAGE 53 ---
race that lasts 15 to 20 minutes is just about the optimal physiological stress
on those systems of the body that are taxed during an interval session.
Second, it might be best to do a workout on Wednesday each week, the
day after that midweek race. This has worked out so well over the years that
I often used that approach with collegiate runners. Not that I had a Tuesday
race each week, but we would often train hard Tuesday and come back
Wednesday for another quality workout. It is true that the muscular
discomfort associated with a hard session is realized more about 48 hours
after the stress than it is 24 hours afterward. Therefore, a Wednesday quality
session can often be performed quite well and even better than it might have
been if put off until Thursday.
Here are additional benefits to scheduling back-to-back training days on
Tuesday and Wednesday. First, this means you have 2 easy days before any
Saturday races and 2 easy days after a Saturday race before the next
Tuesday race or training session. Second, some runners like to run quality
sessions faster than I have asked them to run, and this back-to-back
schedule often solves this problem. For example, if I say, “Tuesday you are
to run six 1,000-meter runs at 3:20 each, with 3-minute recoveries,” they
are less likely to try running them in 3:15 (too fast) if I also add, “and
tomorrow you will be running six 1-mile runs at 5:44 with 1-minute rests
between.” Knowing another quality session is coming tomorrow tends to
put a damper on overtraining on the first of the 2 back-to-back days. Third,
when you get into track season, you may attend 2-day meets in which you
have to race on 2 consecutive days, and your back-to-back training sessions
will have prepared you for this.
Understanding the principles of training helps you minimize the
possibility of overtraining while letting you take full advantage of the work
you are doing. Remember to always try to achieve the greatest possible
benefit from the least amount of training rather than getting the greatest
possible benefit from the hardest training possible.
When increasing the training stress, always stay at a chosen degree of
stress for 6 to 8 weeks before making changes. It is a mistake to try to make
each week of training, or each specific workout, better than the previous
week or the last time you did that specific workout. I would much rather
--- PAGE 54 ---
have my runners come to me saying a particular workout is starting to feel
too easy than for them to be struggling to go a little faster each time they
train.
Training is not always fun, but it should be rewarding, so don’t overdo it.
Coaches and athletes should be conservative when increasing the training
stress. I let race performances tell me when it is time to increase the stress
of training rather than increasing the stress level too often in hopes of a
performance improvement.
The following are not necessarily principles of training but topics of
particular importance that might fit into a talk of training principles: how
you stride over the ground and how you breathe when running.
STRIDE RATE
During the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles, my wife and I spent every day
of the running events counting different runners’ stride frequency, often
several times for the same runner, during prelims and finals and also early
and late in the same race. In all, we examined about 50 runners, both male
and female and in events from the 800 to the marathon.
Of all the runners tested, only one took fewer than 180 steps per minute.
Turnover was well over 200 per minute in the 800 and sometimes in the
1,500, but from the 3,000 (a women’s event in the 1984 Olympics) through
the marathon, the rate was quite similar and only stride length was reduced
as the race became longer.
I tested one Olympic gold medalist in the marathon. At a 7-minute-per-
mile pace, the rate was 184; at a 6-minute pace, it moved up to 186; and at a
5-minute pace, it moved up to 190. This represented a much greater
increase in running speed than the increase in rate. It is quite clear that
runners seem most comfortable with a particular rhythm, and that rhythm
varies little as they change stride length to increase speed during different
races.
--- PAGE 55 ---
180 Steps per Minute
One reason I strongly emphasize trying to run with a stride rate around 180
steps per minute is to minimize the landing shock associated with running.
Keep in mind that the slower the leg turnover, the more time you are
spending in the air; the more time you spend in the air, the higher you are
elevating your body mass; and the higher you elevate your body mass, the
harder you hit the ground on the next landing. Believe me, it is during the
impact associated with hitting the ground that many little injuries occur.
So, how do you minimize landing shock when running? A simple way of
explaining it is to pretend you are rolling over the ground rather than
bounding from foot to foot. Try to avoid placing each foot out in front of
yourself, which often acts as a braking action, increasing the impact force
as you go from one foot to the other. Try to have your feet land closer back,
toward your center of gravity, so your body is floating (or rolling) over your
feet.
Foot Strike
Another issue is what part of your feet hit the ground first (i.e., where is
your foot strike?). Where you strike the ground (relative to your center of
gravity) is one concern, and another is how your feet strike the ground.
Foot strike tends to vary, not only among runners but also depending on
the event for which you are training. It is most common for those racing in
short events (e.g., sprinters and even some middle-distance runners) to hit
the ground on the balls of their feet, almost as if they were running on their
toes. On the other hand, many longer-distance runners, which certainly
includes those who are running a marathon, tend to strike the ground with a
heel-first landing or, in some cases, a midfoot landing.
From my years of testing many runners of all ability levels, it has
become apparent that some people are more comfortable using a certain
type of foot strike. Runners who are relatively new to the sport should
experiment with different foot-strike techniques and use the one that is most
comfortable, that is the least fatiguing, and that allows for a light and quick
turnover rate of about 180 steps per minute.
--- PAGE 56 ---
In particular, if you are experiencing calf or shin discomfort, try to
concentrate on a mid- or rear-foot landing technique for a few weeks and
see if that solves your problem. Very often, just focusing on taking 180
steps each minute will result in the foot strike that suits you best.
One final thought about foot strike is to try to avoid turning your toes
outward as you land. Have someone watch you from the front as you run
toward them, checking to see if your feet are striking the ground with the
toes pointing straight forward rather than to the side. A turned-out foot on
landing often leads to shin pain along the inside of the lower leg.
Go for 180 steps a minute and learn to roll over the ground with as little
effort as possible, and running should be much more enjoyable and leave
you more injury free. I sometimes tell runners they should imagine they are
running over a field of raw eggs and their goal is to not break any of them;
be light on your feet and comfortable in your landing. And one final note—
don’t count each foot when counting stride rate; just count the right (or left)
foot and look for 90 (assuming, of course, that you take as many steps with
the left as you do with your right).
--- PAGE 57 ---
One of the finest and most accomplished female runners of all time, “Catherine the Great” Ndereba is
seen here with her breathing under control and in stride just prior to heel strike.
BREATHING WHILE RUNNING
It is important to understand your breathing and how it should feel when
running. People who have asthma or other breathing-related issues need to
discuss their ventilation problems with their doctor so they are doing the
best they can to eliminate stressful situations relative to their breathing.
In normal atmospheric conditions, the breathing discomfort that is
sometimes associated with exercising (specifically, running) hard is not due
to a lack of oxygen (O2) in your lungs. The feeling of wanting to breathe
harder is caused by an increase in the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) in
--- PAGE 58 ---
your lungs. In normal air (i.e., in a building or outside in open air), there is
very little CO2. In fact only about .04 percent of normal air is CO2.
Impact of CO2
In your lungs, because your blood is always delivering CO2 from
functioning tissues throughout your body, there is a much greater fraction of
this gas compared with how much is in the air you breathe in. In fact, at any
given time, even during rest, the air in your lungs is about 4 percent or even
5 percent CO2. You feel quite comfortable when your lungs contain this
much CO2, but when you start exercising, the muscles you use while
running produce much more CO2 than when at rest, so the fraction of this
waste product of exercise is increased.
When your body senses an increase above the normal 4 or 5 percent, you
breathe harder to get rid of the excess CO2. So it is the increase in this gas,
not a drop in the amount of O2, that stimulates you to breathe harder. In fact,
you always have plenty of O2 as long as you are breathing normal air.
An extreme example of how the buildup of CO2 increases the desire to
breathe is when you hold your breath to see how far you can swim
underwater. That intense desire to inhale a good breath of fresh air is the
increase in CO2 that results from not breathing; it is not due to a lack of O2.
In fact, if you were to reach a state of insufficient O2, you would pass out
because not enough O2 is being delivered to the brain. We are quite
fortunate that the increase in CO2 drives us to breathe before the lack of O2
results in our passing out.
So how does this all relate to breathing while running? Well, the harder
you run, the faster you deliver CO2 to the lungs, and that increase in CO2
drives you to breathe harder to reduce the concentration of that gas in your
lungs, which, of course, also helps you stay well above the concentration of
O2 needed for the work being done.
Breathing Rhythms
The total amount of air that you breathe each minute is the product of the
size and number of breaths you take each minute. As you start to run, you
--- PAGE 59 ---
usually increase both the size and number of breaths, but the rate at which
you breathe is typically in rhythm with your stride rate.
When not running very hard, you may breathe in for three steps and
breathe out for three steps, and you may stay with this rate even when you
feel the need to breathe harder by just increasing the size of each breath.
When running a little harder, you feel the need to ventilate even more, so
you switch to a faster breathing rhythm; for runners this is usually by taking
two steps while breathing in and two steps while breathing out (referred to
as a 2-2 breathing rhythm).
Most accomplished runners breathe with a 2-2 rhythm, especially when
running fairly hard, because it is comfortable and allows a sizable amount
of air to be breathed in and out of the lungs. I strongly recommend using a
2-2 rhythm during practice and in competition, at least during the first two-
thirds of middle-distance races, as I explain later in the chapter. You may be
able to breathe at a slower rate when running slowly, but it is usually better
to use that good 2-2 rhythm even in easy runs, and in threshold, interval,
and repetition workouts, so it becomes natural.
When considering the rate at which you breathe, you must understand
that the important aspect of breathing is to ventilate the lungs with fresh air.
Let’s take, for example, a few different situations. If you breathe with a 4-4
rhythm, you will certainly move a large amount of air into your lungs with
each breath you take, but this 4-4 rhythm means you are taking only about
22 breaths per minute (180 steps per minute divided by 8 steps per
breathing cycle means you are taking 22.5 breaths per minute). Let’s say
you are moving 4 liters of air in and out with each breath; this means you
are moving 90 liters of air in and out of your lungs per minute, and believe
me, if working hard, that is not very much.
Now, let’s go to a 3-3 rhythm, which may reduce the amount of each
breath to 3.5 liters per breath, which means you are now moving 3.5 liters
in and out, 30 times per minute, and 30 × 3.5 = 105 liters per minute, 16
percent more air per minute. Now, let’s try a 2-2 breathing rhythm, which
will give you 45 breaths per minute and about 3 liters per breath. In this
case you move 135 liters of air per minute (3 × 45 = 135), which is doing a
--- PAGE 60 ---
better job of ventilating the lungs, reducing CO2 buildup, and increasing the
O2 content of the air in your lungs.
We can go one step further and try a 1-1 breathing rhythm (something
you often hear novice runners doing at the end of a hard race). With this
rate of breathing, the size of each breath will be greatly reduced, and the
total amount of air moved in and out may not even be as much as can be
accomplished with a slower yet deeper rate. In addition, realize that a
portion of each breath you move through your mouth and nose is dead-
space air, the air that does not reach the lungs for gas exchange. The faster
the breathing rate, the greater the portion of each breath and of each minute
that is not involved in O2 and CO2 exchange.
Obviously, faster breathing rates are a little more costly in terms of
energy expenditure of the breathing muscles, but at some point, the
ventilation factor, along with the cost factor, usually ends up favoring a
breathing rhythm of somewhere around a 2-2 (or 2-1) rhythm. Taking three
steps per breathing cycle using a 2-1 rhythm gives you 60 breaths per
minute (1 each second). This probably allows for the greatest amount of air
to be moved per minute while running, but it is usually not necessary until
you are working very hard, such as in the last part of a 5K or 10K race. Of
all the elite runners I have tested in the lab, about 86 percent of them
automatically choose a 2-2 rhythm until working at maximum, at which
time they go to 2-1 or 1-2. Whether the elite runners have learned over the
years that this is the most efficient approach, or whether someone has
suggested this to them, it makes sense to adjust to this rhythm early in a
career without having to wait for it to become the natural thing to do.
One way I demonstrate the effects of the different breathing rhythms to
my runners is to ask them to run five laps on the track (just at moderate
intensity, not racing). For the first lap they are to breathe with a 4-4 rhythm,
then 3-3 for lap two, 2-2 for lap three, 1-1 for lap four, and back to 4-4 for
lap five. Then I ask them which was most stressful and which was most
comfortable.
Something that works quite well with younger runners is to have them
breathe with a 2-2 rhythm for the first two-thirds of a race (e.g., first 2 miles
of a 5K cross country race), then go to 2-1 or 1-2 for the final third of the
--- PAGE 61 ---
race. If they can’t manage 2-2 for the first two-thirds of the race, it tells
them they have gone out too fast, and next time they are to set an easier
early pace.
How much air any particular runner moves in and out of the lungs per
minute varies a great deal. Two Olympians I tested were similar in size and
in performance, but during a maximum-effort test, one breathed 160 liters
per minute and the other 224 liters per minute. One was breathing just over
2.6 liters per breath and the other just over 3.6 liters per breath. People
definitely vary in minute ventilation and in the size of each breath.
One situation where a faster breathing rate is a little easier is when
running at altitude. The air at altitude is less dense and offers less resistance
to flowing in and out of the breathing airways. I have known at least two
great runners who used a 1-1 breathing rhythm at altitude when working
really hard.
A runner can also use the knowledge of breathing rhythm to determine
how hard she is working. If you can breathe comfortably with a 3-3 rhythm
during a long steady run, this means you are not working too hard, but if
you feel you must breathe 2-2 to get enough air, then you are not working
that easily. I am not suggesting that you use a 3-3 breathing rhythm during
all easy long runs (2-2 is still probably the way to go), but giving 3-3 a try
for a few minutes would tell you how hard you are working. This is similar
to knowing you are going too hard during threshold running (i.e., if you
can’t use a 2-2 rhythm and have to go to 2-1 or 1-2). I’m not suggesting you
need to constantly monitor your breathing, but it is good to know how you
can use this information during training and racing to judge the effort you
are putting forth.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 62 ---
 
--- PAGE 63 ---
Chapter 3
Physiological and Personal
Training Profiles
Find ways to benefit from adversity and from
less-than-desirable race results.
In this chapter I describe profiles of how various systems of the body react
to increasing levels of stress. In other words, as you work harder, or run
faster, relationships are seen between the intensity of the work being done
and how fast the heart beats or how much oxygen is being consumed or the
accumulation of blood lactate or how you envision the workloads you are
being exposed to. In some cases equal increases in running speed cause a
relatively predictable increase in physiological response, but in other cases
the response is not linear. Oxygen consumption, for example, reacts quite
predictably to steady increases in running speed (under calm conditions on
a flat surface), whereas the accumulation of blood lactate does not show
such a predictable, or linear, response curve.
AEROBIC PROFILE
Figure 3.1 shows how the aerobic system of one elite runner I tested
responded to steady, periodic increases in running speed. I should point out
that the speed of running was increased by the same amount every 5
minutes of the test. Keeping the runner at 5 minutes at each workload
guaranteed that the response was in a steady state; the response was not
changing after the second or third minute of continuous work. In other
words, the response represented what each speed was aerobically
demanding.
--- PAGE 64 ---
Emil Zátopek, considered by many to be the greatest distance runner of the 20th century, had a
profound impact on the running world with his intense high-volume interval training system that, in
his words, “increased speed and stamina.”
It is clear when examining figure 3.1 that 
 O2 (oxygen consumption)
responds quite linearly to increases in running speed, and we call the curve
that represents this 
O2 response an economy curve because it represents
how much aerobic involvement is associated with increasing workloads.
Some runners are said to be more economical than others because they use
less oxygen to run at the same speed.
Figure 3.2 clearly shows how much two well-trained runners can vary in
running economy. The two runners, whose 
O2 profiles are depicted in
--- PAGE 65 ---
figure 3.2, were teammates who consistently ran similar times in various
races. Based on the fact that runner 1 had a considerably higher 
O2max (by
over 15%) than runner 2, it would be easy to say that he was the better
runner, but when you include the relative economy curves for the two
runners, it is easy to see why runner 2 was able to compete successfully
with runner 1. Simply extrapolating each runner’s economy curve out to his
O2max and looking at the speed that is associated with each runner’s max,
it is clear that both are of equal ability relative to performing at their
respective max values, which for these two runners was a speed of about
325 meters per minute. The speed of running that is associated with each
runner’s combined 
O2max and running economy is referred to as “velocity
at 
 O2max” (v
 O2max) as I originally termed it, described it, and presented
it to the running world many years ago. It is without question that v
 O2max
is a better way to compare potential running performance than is either
economy or 
O2, independently.
Figure 3.1    Representative running economy curve.
--- PAGE 66 ---
Figure 3.2    Two runners with considerable differences in 
 O2max and economy and with very
similar v
O2max and race times.
--- PAGE 67 ---
Figure 3.3    Three elite female runners with variations in running economy and 
O2max produce
similar predicted and actual 3,000-meter times.
Adapted by permission from J. Daniels et al., “Elite and Sub-Elite Female Middle- and Long-Distance Runners,” in D.
Landers, ed., Sport and Elite Performers: The 1984 Olympic Scientific Congress Proceedings, vol. 3 (Champaign, IL:
Human Kinetics, 1986). First published in J. Daniels, “A Case for Running Economy, an Important Determinant of
Distance Running,” in V. Gambetta (ed.), Track Technique 92 (Los Altos, CA: Track & Field News, 1985): 2937-2938.
Figure 3.3 and figure 3.4 are examples of how economy can vary among
individual runners and under various running conditions. Figure 3.3 shows
three elite female runners I tested some years ago. It is easily seen that the
three women varied a great deal in 
 O2max and in running economy, but all
three had almost identical v
 O2max values and ran almost identical times
for 3,000 meters. Interestingly, the runner with the lowest 
O2max was a
U.S. collegiate national champion in 10,000 meters, and the one with the
highest max was also very successful in international competitions.
Figure 3.4 shows the changes in aerobic, heart rate, and blood lactate
profiles of an elite runner I was able to test in the early part of his track
season and later in the season when he was in better shape. As shown in
figure 3.4, this runner’s maximum heart rate (HR) was the same (196)
during both test sessions, but his 
 O2max had increased from about 73 to
nearly 78, which is just about a 7 percent increase in a matter of a few
months. With the increase he experienced in running economy, his v

--- PAGE 68 ---
O2max rose from 358 to 387 meters per minute, which is an 8 percent
increase.
His blood lactate profile also improved a good deal: A 5.0 mmol value
was initially associated with a running speed of 330 meters per minute, and
this rose to about 355 meters per minute, another 7.5 percent improvement.
During both test sessions, this runner showed a 4.0 blood lactate
accumulation when running at about 85 to 87 percent of his 
O2max, which
is typical for well-trained runners.
Figure 3.4    The comparison of heart rate (HR), oxygen consumption (
 O2), and blood lactate level
(BLa) of an elite runner during the early season and midseason.
Variations in Running Economy
Running economy can vary depending on where you are running. Figure
3.5 shows the results of a group of well-trained runners who were tested
under four conditions—at sea level (both on a treadmill and on a track) and
at an altitude of 2,000 meters (also both on a treadmill and on a track). 
O2max values were the same on a track and treadmill, both at sea level and
--- PAGE 69 ---
at altitude. It is clear that 
 O2max was lower at altitude under both
conditions (track and treadmill), but it is also clear that at altitude the
aerobic demand of running is less than it is at sea level. This means that
some of the running ability lost at altitude, because of a lower 
O2max, is
regained because of decreased air resistance and better economy at altitude.
A closer look at figure 3.5 indicates that upon arrival at altitude, 
O2max
was lower by about 13 percent, but because of less dense air to run against
at altitude, economy is improved to the point that v
 O2max (and
performance) differs by only about 6 percent.
Figure 3.5     
O2max levels at sea level and at altitude are equal when measured on the track and on
a treadmill. However, economy is much better on a treadmill both at sea level and at altitude than it is
on the track.
Gender Differences in 
 O2max and Running
Economy
One reason that men race longer distances faster than women is because the
best men have higher 
O2max values than the best women. There is a fair
amount of variation among both the top men and the top women, and I have
tested Olympic-caliber male runners with max values between 68 and 86 ml
--- PAGE 70 ---
. min-1 . kg-1. Usually those with lower max values are better at the 800 and
1,500 distances because of the greater anaerobic demand of those events.
These 800 and 1,500 types are also more economical at faster speeds than
are the longer-distance specialists, most likely because they spend more
time perfecting their running mechanics at faster speeds.
How about a comparison of running economy between men and women?
I have had the honor of testing large numbers of both male and female elite
runners. The men are slightly more economical than the women, but the
difference is not much at all. Part of the reason some researchers say
women are not as economical as men is that they compare the two while
running at the same submax speeds. The result shows that when running at
any given submax speed, women consume a fair amount more oxygen (per
kilogram of body weight per minute) than do men, but this is not being fair
to the women because when running at the same speed, the women are
running at a higher fraction of their (lower) 
O2max values.
The more realistic approach is to compare the genders when both are
running at the same fraction of their respective 
O2max values. So, the
better way to compare running economy is to calculate it in terms of 
 O2
per kilogram of body weight per kilometer of running. For example, if a
man and a woman both have their 
O2 tested when running at a speed of
300 meters per minute, the man might be consuming 57 ml of O2 per
kilogram per minute and the woman 60 ml/kg, which is a 5 percent
difference in economy. However if the woman’s max is 67 and the man’s is
73, he is working at only 78 percent of his max and she is at 89.5 percent of
her max; the faster you run, the less economical you are, so the woman
should be tested at a speed that elicits 78 percent of her max.
Let’s say she is at 268 meters per minute when running at 78 percent of
her max, and that speed demands a relative 
O2 of 50 ml/kg. You need to
calculate the aerobic demand per kilometer of running, which for her would
be 1,000 meters divided by 268 meters per minute, meaning it would take
3.73 minutes to run 1,000 meters, and 3.73 × 50 = 187 ml of O2 per
kilogram of body weight per kilometer of running.
If the man, when at 78 percent of his max, is running 300 meters per
minute, it would take him 3.33 minutes to complete a kilometer. If his
--- PAGE 71 ---
relative 
O2 at that speed is 56 ml/kg/min, his 
 O2 per kilogram of body
weight per kilometer is 56 × 3.33, which equals 187 ml/kg/km, and the two
runners are equal in economy when both run at the same relative intensity.
RUNNING VARIABLES AND
IMPROVEMENTS
The important thing for any runner is to improve as many variables as
possible in order to perform better. Just looking at figures 3.1 and 3.2, it is
obvious that in order to improve running performance, it is necessary to
include training that will improve aerobic power (
 O2max) and running
economy, and as either, or both, of these variables improves, there will be
an improvement in the important v
O2max variable.
Keep in mind that any person can run at various fractions of v
 O2max
for different durations. For example, you can race at about 93 percent of v
O2max for any event that lasts about 30 minutes, so as v
 O2max is
improved, so is the race speed for any specific time. I will show how I have
been able to use this information to develop the very popular VDOT tables
that I discuss in chapter 5.
It is not uncommon for some runners to plot blood lactate values against
running speed, as I did when I compared 
O2 with running speed. When
designing a blood lactate profile, this is also accomplished by testing a
runner at a number of submaximal speeds.
Figure 3.6 shows a typical blood lactate profile of a runner I tested on
several occasions; this figure shows lactate profiles for the same runner at
two different times in the competitive season. It is desirable for the curve to
shift toward the right with improved endurance, which indicates the runner
is running at a faster speed before the lactate value is as high as it was in
earlier testing. This right shift in the lactate profile occurs as the body
improves its ability to clear the lactate being produced; as well,
improvements in 
 O2max and running economy increase the speed at which
a given lactate value is reached.
One way to realize how various changes can affect the lactate profile is
to consider that a specific blood lactate value is associated with running at
--- PAGE 72 ---
86 percent of 
 O2max. This being the case, then the same fraction (or
percentage) of an increased 
O2max will be associated with a faster v
O2max. It’s the same thing for an increase in running economy—better
economy also increases v
 O2max, so the blood lactate value at the same
fraction of an increased v
 O2max will be associated with a faster speed than
it had been earlier in the training cycle.
Figure 3.6    Blood lactate curves for the same runner taken before and after several weeks of
training.
The same thing can be done with heart rate, for those who are in tune
with their heart rates during training. If you have a heart-rate check
associated with 
O2 or speeds of running, then a specific heart rate will also
be associated with a specific blood lactate value.
Let’s say, for example, that your heart rate is at 164 when you are at a
blood lactate value of 4.0 mmol, and that this heart rate is also about 88 to
90 percent of your maximum heart rate. Keep in mind that heart rate is
pretty closely associated with how much work you are doing, as well as
what your aerobic involvement is at any particular running speed. As you
improve your running economy, 
 O2max or v
 O2max will be associated
with a faster speed of running, and the same fraction of that improved v

--- PAGE 73 ---
O2max will be associated with the same heart rate that was earlier
representative of a slower speed of running.
You could even go a step further and associate your subjective feeling of
stress with different fractions of your maximum heart rate, aerobic power,
or blood lactate values. One way of doing this is to relate numbers with
your feeling of comfort or discomfort (called a rating of perceived exertion,
or RPE). For example, you might assign easy running a number from 1 to 3;
comfortable hard work might equal a 4 or 5 ranking, with 6, 7, and 8 related
to different degrees of hard work; and 9 and 10 might mean you are
working very hard. Or you might just use a 5-point scale, with 1 being easy
work and 5 the hardest work you do. Figure 3.7 shows how a runner’s heart
rate, 
O2, blood lactate, and RPE were all related to the speed at which this
runner was running.
Figure 3.7    Aerobic and blood lactate (BLa) profiles and heart rate and rating of perceived exertion
(RPE) responses to run speeds.
Figure 3.7 also shows the 
O2 (66 ml . min-1 . kg-1) and heart rate (170 B .
min-1) values that were associated with a blood lactate value of 4.0 mmol,
which for this subject was considered lactate threshold.
--- PAGE 74 ---
HEART RATE DURING TRAINING
RUNS
Let’s now discuss using heart rate during training runs to determine training
intensities. Devices are now available that can be used during training runs
to show heart rate, breathing rhythm, and stride rate, and these can be useful
as long as they are associated with reasonable scientific data.
You must understand that running intensity is not always the same at the
same speed of running. For example, under hot weather conditions, the
heart has to work harder at any given speed of running than when under
cool conditions because more blood is diverted to the skin for cooling
purposes. With more blood going to the skin and the same required amount
going to the running muscles, there is an increase in total blood flow and in
heart rate. This means that if a runner is trying to use heart rate to monitor a
particular speed of running, speed will be slower than anticipated.
The same situation will occur if running into a wind, on hilly terrain, or
over rough or muddy footing; shooting for a specific heart rate will result in
a slower-than-hoped-for speed of running. It is fair to say that a slower
speed of running under less-than-desirable conditions will often still be
associated with the desired intensity of exercise, even though not at the
same speed.
So, it is always important to be able to answer the question “What is the
purpose of this workout?” If the purpose of a specific workout is to spend
time at a specific speed of running, then it might be necessary to not let
heart rate be the guide, but if intensity of effort is the most important thing
being sought, then heart rate can be very useful. I like to say that
monitoring heart rate can be a good thing for runners as long as they
understand how heart rates can vary based on conditions.
Maximum Heart Rate
A very important matter relative to using heart rate for monitoring training
stress is knowing your personal maximum heart rate because it is very
typical to consider training at a variety of fractions of maximum heart rate.
--- PAGE 75 ---
A few methods are used to estimate maximum heart rate, primarily based on
age, but these formulas can be inaccurate. An example is an often-used
formula that involves subtracting your age from 220; so if you are 50 years
old, a calculated maximum heart rate would be 170 (220 − 50).
Now, this formula, and others, for that matter, may do a decent job of
estimating maximum heart rate for a large group of people, but it could be
very misleading for a specific person. I can cite two people, whom I tested
on numerous occasions, whose maximum heart rates fell far from their
predicted values. One male runner, at age 30, had a maximum heart rate of
148, and this same runner, at age 55, had a maximum heart rate of 146. You
can imagine how far off you would be if you told this runner, when he was
30 years old, that to run at 86 percent of his maximum heart rate he would
need to maintain a heart rate of 163; this would be impossible for a person
with a max heart rate of 148.
Another of my subjects had a maximum heart rate of 186 when he was
25 years old (lower than predicted when using 220 – age), and this same
runner had a maximum heart rate of 192 when he was 50 years old (far
higher than predicted using 220 – age as a formula). My point is that if you
do use heart rate as a measure of relative running intensities, you need to
have a pretty good idea of what your personal maximum heart rate is.
As a runner, probably the easiest way to determine your maximum heart
rate is to run several hard 2-minute uphill runs. Get a heart-rate reading at
the top of the first hill run, and if your heart rate is higher the second time
up, go for a third time and see if that is associated with an even higher heart
rate. If it is not higher, you can be pretty sure that reading is maximum. If
the third run is higher than the second, then try a fourth, or as many as
needed before you do not see an increase in heart rate compared with the
previous run. If no hill is available, you could just do a few 800-meter runs
at a solid pace and do the same comparisons between repeated efforts.
Resting Heart Rate
Another way that monitoring heart rates can be useful includes noting
resting heart rate upon waking in the morning. Your waking heart rate can
show how your fitness is progressing; with time, resting heart rate will
--- PAGE 76 ---
typically get slower as a result of your heart getting stronger and capable of
pumping more blood with each beat (increased stroke volume). As your
heart muscle gets stronger, it doesn’t have to beat as often to deliver the
same amount of blood to various parts of your body because each beat is
delivering more. Waking heart rate can also indicate a state of overtraining,
and if your morning heart rate is considerably higher than what you
normally measure, you might need a rest or to get a health checkup.
Hemoglobin Content
Another factor that will affect heart rate is the status of your blood’s
oxygen-carrying capacity. Oxygen is carried by hemoglobin (Hgb) in the
blood, so having a desirable hemoglobin content is an important
consideration, especially for endurance athletes.
When your hemoglobin levels are below normal, you will not feel very
good and will certainly not be prepared for an ideal performance as a
runner. On the other hand, it is not wise to try to elevate your hemoglobin to
very high values because this will increase the viscosity of the blood, which
puts too much strain on the heart and can actually slow circulation.
Having a normal hemoglobin value is primarily a matter of good
nutrition and consuming foods that have iron in them. Typical normal
hemoglobin values are between 12 and 18 grams per deciliter of blood
(depending on age and gender). People are often considered anemic when
they have hemoglobin values below 13.5 (for men) or 12 (women), and
from a running performance point of view, the difference between a 12 and
13 in hemoglobin could be about 30 to 40 seconds in a 5K run. Again, it is
not desirable to try driving that number up high, however.
PERSONAL TRAINING AND RACING
PROFILES
Before setting up a training program, runners or coaches should gather
basic information about the past and current state of fitness and time
availability. I gather detailed information from all my runners (see figure
3.8), making it much easier to plot a training plan that best fits each
--- PAGE 77 ---
individual. This information is critical when dealing with runners by email,
and it is also important for any high school, college, or club coach.
Knowing current or recent mileage and workouts makes it much easier
to determine the appropriate training loads and training intensities that will
best prepare each athlete for the important race or races ahead. Clearly, you
must also know the types of races that are of most importance in the weeks
and months ahead.
Even if you are a school coach and know the facilities available, writing
them down helps you plot out training for any weather conditions. Plotting
out a season of training is not as easy as it may seem, and having individual
(or team) profiles can go a long way in coming up with the best possible
training program. I find myself referring to runner profiles whenever
writing out a season’s training schedule, such as the ones presented in the
later chapters of the book.
FIGURE 3.8
Runner Profile
--- PAGE 79 ---
From J. Daniels, Daniels’ Running Formula, 4th ed. (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2022).
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 80 ---
 
--- PAGE 81 ---
Chapter 4
Types of Training and
Intensities
Focus on the task at hand.
As I often mention, you must always be able to answer the question “What
is the purpose of this workout?” If you can’t answer this all-important
question, then you may be better off not doing any training at this particular
time. In this chapter I describe the various types of training a runner
engages in and how these different types of training benefit a runner.
E, M, T, I, and R refer to intensities of training and stand for the types
of training (shown in figure 4.1) that make up most training programs. E
stands for Easy running, M for Marathon-pace running, T for Threshold
running, I for Interval training, and R for Repetition training.
Figure 4.1 also indicates typical durations of training (in minutes), both
for steady runs and for repeated bouts of work (W/R). Also shown are
purposes and benefits of each type of training, the percentage of weekly
miles that is typically associated with a single session, the percentage of 
O2max related to each type of training, and work–recovery ratios for
intermittent training sessions.
--- PAGE 82 ---
Figure 4.1    The different types of training showing the percent of 
 O2max, the range of time per
workout, the benefits, the work-to-rest ratio, and the percentage of weekly miles.
Adapted from J. Daniels and N. Scardina, “Internal Training and Performance,” Sports Medicine 1, no. 4 (1984): 327-
334, with permission from Adis, a Wolters Kluwer business (© Adis Data Information BV 1984). All rights reserved.
EASY RUNNING
E stands for easy and is typically an intensity about 59 to 74 percent of 
O2max or about 65 to 79 percent of maximum heart rate. What is the
purpose of easy running? There are several benefits, and the first is that you
build up a certain degree of resistance to injury by taking it easy in many of
your runs. E running is especially good for building a base when just
starting out in a running program or when returning to running after a break
of some weeks or months. Think of E runs offering some of the same
benefits that taking it easy in any sport offers—performing the specific
activity of interest with limited stress on the body or mind.
E running does a good job of strengthening the heart muscle because the
maximum force of each stroke of the heart is reached when the heart rate is
at about 60 percent of maximum. As you run faster, heart rate and the
amount of blood pumped with each heart beat (referred to as stroke volume)
both increase, but stroke volume increases minimally. So, fairly easy
running is a good developer of the heart muscle, and although it doesn’t feel
as if you are working very hard, your heart is.
--- PAGE 83 ---
Another benefit of E running is an increase in vascularization (opening
of more tiny blood vessels that feed the exercising muscles) and the
development of characteristics of the muscles themselves that are involved
in running. Even during E running, your heart is delivering a good amount
of blood and oxygen to the exercising muscles, and these muscles respond
by making changes in the muscle fibers that allow the muscles to accept
more oxygen and convert more fuel into energy in a given period. In fact,
many of the benefits gained as a result of this process are a function of time
spent stressing the muscle fibers. You will no doubt spend more time
accomplishing this goal by running Easy because it is easier to last longer at
a comfortable pace than it is at a hard pace.
Training Suggestions
Because 30 minutes of steady running provides considerable benefits for
the time spent running, I suggest that 30 minutes be the minimum duration
of any E run you go out for. I often tell runners that if they don’t manage at
least 30 minutes for a run, that they will end up spending more time
showering and changing clothes than they spent running. I also suggest that
your longest steady run (unless preparing for ultraevents) be 150 minutes
(2.5 hours), even if preparing for a marathon. Obviously, anyone who is
combining walking with running in preparation for a marathon should feel
free to stay out longer than 150 minutes, but all long (L) runs should be
built up to very gradually.
We often hear that when getting started in a program, weekly amounts of
running should increase a little each week (by 10%, for example). This
means that if you run 10 miles in your first week of running, in the second
week you go for 11 miles (a 10% increase), and after 4 weeks you will have
built up to 14.6 miles. I would rather see this runner stay at, and adjust to,
the initial 10 miles for 4 weeks, then increase the weekly amount by about
another 5 miles (they started with 10 so adding 5 at one time is not as
stressful as was starting with 10). I suggest that you stay at any amount of
weekly time spent running for at least 3 or 4 weeks before increasing the
training amount. Also, once you have increased weekly time spent running
to an amount you, or your coach, have decided to be your maximum for that
--- PAGE 84 ---
season, feel free to increase or decrease weekly amounts based on weather
or situations that limit or provide more available time. Remember that the
maintenance principle works in your favor when training goes down a little.
Undoubtedly, most runners spend most of their running time working at
an easy pace, a conversational pace that is always comfortable to manage.
In all the training plans I describe, or that I prepare for runners at any level
of performance, I refer to easy running as E running. Sometimes I refer to E
days of training, which means the runner should take it easy on this
particular day, and an E day may even be a day off from running. In
addition to using E pace during L runs, E intensity is also used for a good
part of warming up and cooling down and during recovery jogs between
bouts of faster and harder running.
It is often good to think of E days as opportunities to accumulate the
mileage needed to reach your desired weekly mileage goals. For example, if
you are trying to total 40 miles in a particular week and you have a 10-mile
L run one day and a total of 8 miles (including warm-up, some faster
quality running, and cool-down) on two other days, this means you have to
accumulate another 14 miles on the remaining 4 days.
This could be done by running 3 to 5 E miles on each of these 4 days, or
you might run 5 or 6 miles on 2 of the 4 days, plus 3 on another day, and
take 1 day off completely from running. Sometimes a day off works out
best in your weekly schedule (maybe because of difficult weather or an
unexpected commitment), and you should think of time off from running as
part of training rather than as a missed training day. Remember, the E days
are included so that you get proper recovery from the quality (Q) sessions,
so it is not a good idea to add an additional Q session in place of an E
session.
Easy Running Pace
Although E running is typically performed at about 59 to 74 percent of 
O2max or about 65 to 79 percent of maximum heart rate, at times you may
feel more comfortable going a little faster (or slower). The important thing,
especially if going extra slow on an E run, is to make every effort to
maintain good running mechanics, because losing desirable mechanics may
--- PAGE 85 ---
lead to injury. Remember this when you are feeling particularly tired or not
quite right with your stride—this may be one of those days when not
running will do you more good than forcing yourself to struggle through a
run and end up with a minor injury.
You will notice in the VDOT tables in chapter 5 that I list a range of E-
pace running speeds, and that range is about 2 to 3 minutes per mile slower
than you might be able to race for 1 mile, so it should be clear that E
running is not very stressful.
Long Runs and Increasing Mileage
Relative to L runs, which are typically at E pace, I like to limit any single L
run to no more than 30 percent of weekly mileage for runners who are
totaling fewer than 40 miles (64 km) per week. For those who are
accumulating 40 or more miles per week, I suggest that L runs not exceed
the lesser of 25 percent of weekly mileage or 150 minutes, whichever
comes first.
--- PAGE 86 ---
I had the pleasure of coaching Janet Cherobon-Bawcom (beginning in 2011) and seeing her reach her
running potential through the training approach presented in this book and the Run SMART Project.
Try to stay with the same weekly mileage for 4 weeks before making an
increase, which also means your L runs will stay similar for several weeks
at a time. Also, feel free to reduce the duration of an L run if some weeks
you are not feeling as good as in others, if conditions make the same L run
much more stressful, or if you need to back off a little for a coming race.
I often get into lively discussions about L runs for slower marathon
runners, and certainly marathon running has become a very popular
fundraising event, with many runners taking 5 hours, or longer, to complete
a marathon. It is not uncommon for some runners and coaches to say that in
--- PAGE 87 ---
order to complete a marathon you must have some 20-mile (32 km) training
runs.
For someone who is going to spend 6 or 7 hours completing a marathon,
this means a training run that lasts about 5 hours, and that sure seems like a
little too much stress for a beginner. I doubt many elite marathon runners go
for 40- or 50-mile training runs, which would take them about 5 hours, so it
doesn’t make sense for not-so-accomplished runners to spend more time
training than do the best.
When you consider that the top runners do go for 20-mile runs and
longer, you must realize that they accomplish these runs in about 2 to 2.5
hours, and that is the main reason I think 2.5 hours is long enough, even if it
gets a runner a total of only 15 miles (24 km). Get in the habit of using time
rather than distance as the factor limiting types of training.
In summary, E runs help build resistance to injury, strengthen the heart
muscle, improve the delivery of blood, and promote useful characteristics
of the muscle fibers that will help you run at your best. In addition,
increasing the duration of E runs (and it’s much easier to increase mileage
or duration of your runs if they are easy) is a good boost for your
confidence that you can last a long time if you so desire. Never overlook the
mental side of the training you are doing.
MARATHON-PACE RUNNING
Marathon-pace running, as the name implies, is training at your projected
marathon race pace. I refer to this as M-pace running. For runners who have
not previously run a marathon, it poses the question of the proper pace to
use, which is definitely another benefit of the VDOT tables provided in
chapter 5. These tables show the relative performances for a variety of race
distances and the corresponding marathon times. It is always best to use a
recent longer race for the purpose of predicting your proper M pace (e.g., a
half marathon is better than a mile for predicting your M-pace capability).
Another way to estimate M pace for runners who have recently finished
some serious 10K races is to estimate M pace as being about 3 minutes per
10K slower than 10K race pace.
--- PAGE 88 ---
As shown in figure 4.1, M runs are typically at an intensity of 75 to 84
percent of 
 O2max or about 80 to 89 percent of maximum heart rate. Just as
I have suggested an upper limit on the distance or amount of time spent on
any L run, I also suggest limiting an M run to the lesser of 110 minutes or
18 miles (29 km), whichever comes first. I also like to mix M-pace running
with both E- and T- (threshold) pace running; the maximum accumulated at
M pace may then be less than the time spent in a steady M-pace run. I also
suggest that M-pace running, in a single session of training, not add up to
more than the lesser of 20 percent of your weekly mileage or 18 miles,
whichever comes first. Table 4.1 shows a number of M-pace workouts.
Table 4.1    Marathon-Pace (M) Workouts
Workout
Total
minutes
Training session A: for runners totaling 25 to 70 min E and
50 min M
A1: 15 min E + 50 min M + 10 min E 75 min
A2: 35 min E + 50 min M + 10 min E 95 min
A3: 60 min E + 50 min M + 10 min E 120 min
Training session B: for runners totaling 30 to 70 min E and
60 min M
B1: 15 min E + 60 min M + 15 min E 90 min
B2: 35 min E + 60 min M + 15 min E 110 min
B3: 55 min E + 60 min M + 15 min E 130 min
Training session C: for runners totaling 30 to 60 min E and
75 min M
C1: 15 min E + 75 min M + 15 min E 105 min
C2: 35 min E + 75 min M + 15 min E 125 min
C3: 45 min E + 75 min M + 15 min E 135 min
Training session D: for runners totaling 25 to 45 min E, 55 to
70 min M, and 10 to 15 min T
D1: 15 min E + 30 min M + 5 min T + 30 min M + 5 min T + 5 min M
+ 10 min E
100 min
--- PAGE 89 ---
D2: 15 min E + 5 min T + 40 min M + 5 min T + 15 min M + 5 min T
+ 10 min M + 10 min E
105 min
D3: 15 min E + 50 min M + 5 min T + 20 min M + 5 min T + 30 min E 125 min
Training session E: for runners totaling 40 to 70 min E and
30 to 80 min M
E1: 60 min E + 30 min M + 10 min E 100 min
E2: 60 min E + 40 min M + 10 min E 110 min
E3: 60 min E + 50 min M + 10 min E 120 min
E4: 60 min E + 60 min M + 10 min E 130 min
E5: 30-40 min E + 80 min M + 10 min E 120-130 min
E6: 40-60 min E + 70 min M + 10 min E 120-140 min
“Total minutes” indicates the actual amount of time run. Some workouts also include time at
T pace.
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
Relative to that important question—“What is the purpose of this
workout?”—the purpose of M running, for someone who is training for a
marathon, is to adjust to the specific pace to be used in the coming
marathon and to practice drinking while at this pace. So, you might say the
main benefit of M running is mental, helping you gain confidence at the
pace you plan to race in a coming marathon. The physiological benefits are
really not different from those gained during E running. However, some
runners who are not training for a marathon may find that M-pace runs
build confidence in their ability to handle a fairly prolonged run at
something a little faster than a typical E-pace run.
Using a lot of fuel in the form of carbohydrate helps teach the body to
conserve stored muscle glycogen and rely a little more on fat metabolism.
During some long, steady E runs, it is suggested that you do not take in
energy drinks so your body learns to conserve carbohydrate. However, still
take in water occasionally in practice (in the marathon itself, it helps to take
in fuel, and these training sessions are a good time to practice this).
--- PAGE 90 ---
THRESHOLD RUNNING
The intensity of T (threshold) runs should be comfortably hard, which
means you are working fairly hard, but the pace is manageable for a fairly
long time (certainly 20 or 30 minutes in practice). Peaked and rested, you
can race at T pace for about 60 minutes, which means elite runners run right
at T pace for a 20K or even for a half marathon.
As opposed to M and E runs, which for well-trained runners are usually
not at intensities that you keep hoping will end soon, T-pace runs are of that
type—you do look forward to their coming to an end, but they are
manageable for a single run lasting 20 to 30 minutes.
The all-important purpose of T runs is to allow your body to improve its
ability to clear blood lactate and keep it below a fairly manageable level. It
is often best to think of the purpose of T runs as being to improve your
endurance—teaching your body how to deal with a slightly more
demanding pace for a prolonged period of time, or increasing the duration
of time you can hold at a specific pace. Just as E and M runs improve your
ability to press on mentally at a comfortable pace, T runs improve the speed
you can keep up for a moderately prolonged time period.
Threshold pace would physiologically be at about 85 to 88 percent of 
O2max (88 to 92 percent of maximum heart rate) for well-trained athletes
and more like 80 to 86 percent values for lesser-trained runners. When I
have a runner who is relatively new to my style of coaching and she is
doing a T-pace workout for the first time, I will suggest that she ask herself
during the run if that pace could be maintained for 30 to 40 minutes if
necessary. If the answer to that question is “No,” then the pace must be
slowed a little. Remember, the proper pace is comfortably hard, not hard,
which is an intensity set aside for I (interval) running.
As shown in figure 4.1, I recommend two types of T-pace workouts; one
is a tempo run and the other is what I refer to as cruise intervals. The
difference between these two types of T-pace workouts is that the tempo
run is a steady run lasting about 20 minutes, and cruise intervals are a series
of runs at T pace, with a short rest break between the individual runs. Both
types of T-pace runs have a particular advantage. The steady tempo runs are
--- PAGE 91 ---
better at building confidence that you can keep up a fairly demanding pace
for a prolonged period of time, whereas a session of cruise intervals
subjects your body to a longer total time at the desired threshold intensity.
Even though cruise intervals provide little periodic rest breaks, that does
not mean you should run them faster. In fact, if you think you are not
stressed enough doing cruise intervals, just reduce the recovery time a bit.
Do your tempo runs and cruise intervals at the same designated pace as you
find in the VDOT tables in chapter 5.
As with L runs and M runs, I suggest a limit on how much running to
accumulate at T pace in a single workout session; for T, I suggest not
totaling more than 10 percent of your weekly mileage in a single workout.
However, for any runner who can handle a steady 20-minute T run, I also
suggest a maximum of 30 minutes at T pace if the session is broken into
cruise intervals. After all, if a steady 20-minute run is doable, then 30
minutes shouldn’t be too difficult if broken into shorter 5- or 10-minute
work bouts.
One issue that often comes up regarding tempo runs is duration, and
differences in the definition of tempo cause concern. Some coaches and
runners will talk about a 60-minute or 10-mile (16 km) tempo run, and
when you realize elite runners can just about race at T pace for 60 minutes
(tapered and rested), it is hard to imagine a person going for a 1-hour tempo
run just in training.
What I have found regarding what some coaches and runners refer to as
tempo runs is that the overall distance may, for example, be 10 miles, but
the first 5 or 6 miles of this run are slower than true T pace, and there is a
gradual increase in speed to the point that the final 4 or 5 miles of the run
are actually at T pace. So, the overall run may be referred to as a tempo run,
but only part of the run is at true T pace.
Again, my definition of a tempo run is any run during which the pace of
the entire run is performed at T pace, and when a runner progresses from an
easier pace to true T intensity, only the T-pace portion of that overall run is
tempo. I consider T-pace runs that last about a steady 20 minutes as true
tempo runs. Sessions that involve running a series of shorter-duration runs
at T pace, with short recoveries between the T-pace runs, I refer to as cruise
--- PAGE 92 ---
intervals. A couple examples of typical cruise interval workouts might
involve running five 1-mile runs at T pace with 1-minute rests after each
mile, or three 2-mile runs at T pace with 2-minute rests.
Some of the more advanced runners I have coached have accumulated as
much as 15 miles (24 km) at T pace in a single workout. Typically this is
accomplished by runners who are running around 150 miles (240 km) a
week. The usual approach is to run 5 miles at T pace, then a 5-minute
break, followed by 4 miles T + 4 min rest + 3 miles T + 3 min rest + 2
miles T + 2 min rest + 1 mile T.
Another good approach when training for a marathon is to mix a couple
of 1-mile runs at T pace in the middle of an M-pace workout. For example,
try 8 miles M + 1 mile T + 4 miles M + 1 mile T + 1 mile M. This is to be
a nonstop workout, and the runners who have done this type of training
typically say it is not particularly hard to speed up to T pace after some time
at M pace, but it is not so easy to drop back to M pace after that harder time
at T pace. This prepares you for any surges or changes in wind or hills that
may be encountered in a marathon race.
I typically limit a steady tempo run to about 20 minutes, but you could
do more than one 20-minute T-pace run in the same training session if you
are up to it. In other words, a well-trained runner might run two or three 20-
minute runs at T pace in the same training session, but one 20-minute run in
a single training session is usually enough for most runners.
I usually prescribe 1-mile or 2-mile runs as cruise intervals, and when
doing 1-mile runs you get 1-minute rest breaks between the individual T-
pace runs. For example, I may prescribe a workout in which you are to
repeat five 1-mile runs at T pace, with 1-minute rest breaks between the
individual work bouts (written as 5 × 1 T with 1 min rests). If I suggest 2-
mile runs, then I would recommend 2-minute rests between the T-pace
runs, and for three of these 2-mile runs it would be written as 3 × 2 T with 2
min rests. As is shown in figure 4.1, the recommended work–recovery time
with cruise intervals is about 5 to 1.
See table 4.2 for a number of T-pace workouts that could be used or
modified to fit your needs.
--- PAGE 93 ---
Table 4.2    Threshold-Pace (T) Workouts
To be done at your T-pace intensity. Warm up with a 10-minute E run + end with a few 30-
second strides + finish with some cool-down time.
Workout Total minutes
Training session A: for runners totaling up to 40 miles (64
km) per week
A1: Steady 20 min run at T pace 20 min
Training session B: for runners totaling 41-70 miles (66-113
km) per week
B1: 5-6 × 6 min T with 1 min rests 30-36 min
B2: 2 × 12 min T with 2 min rest + 2 × 5 min T with 1 min rest 34 min
B3: 3 × 12 min T with 2 min rests 36 min
B4: 2 × 15 min T with 3 min rest 30 min
B5: 15 min T + 3 min rest + 10 min T + 2 min rest + 5 min T 30 min
B6: 20 min T + 4 min rest + 10 min T (or 2 × 5 min T with 1 min
rest)
30 min
Training session C: for runners totaling 71-85 miles (114-137
km) per week
C1: 8 × 5 min T with 1 min rests 40 min
C2: 5 × 8 min T with 90 sec rests 40 min
C3: 4 × 10 min T with 2 min rests 40 min
C4: 20 min T + 3 min rest + 2 × 10 min T with 2 min rests + 5 min T 45 min
Training session D: for runners totaling 86-100 miles (138-
160 km) per week
D1: 8 × 6 min T with 1 min rests 48 min
D2: 4 × 12 min T with 2 min rests 48 min
D3: 2 × 12 min T with 3 min rests + 3 × 8 min T with 2 min rests 48 min
D4: 20 min T + 3 min rest + 2 × 12 min T with 2 min rest + 6 min T 50 min
Training session E: for runners totaling 101-120 miles (163-
193 km) per week
E1: 5 × 12 min T with 2 min rests 60 min
E2: 4 × 15 min T with 3 min rests 60 min
E3: 2 × 15 min T with 3 min rest + 2 × 12 min T with 2 min rest + 6
min T
60 min
E4: 3 × 20 min T with 4 min rests 60 min
--- PAGE 94 ---
“Total minutes” indicates the actual amount of time run, not including rests. Some workouts
also include time at T pace.
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
INTERVAL TRAINING
Moving up to the next level of intensity in run training, we arrive at I
(interval) training, probably the most varying in definition of all types of
training. I was once asked to write an article on interval training for a
scientific journal, so I started out by asking three runners what their
definition of I training was.
One said it was “fast” running with intermittent rest breaks, and the fast
runs were to be no longer than 2 minutes. The second runner said interval
training involved repeated hard runs that had to be at least 2 minutes long,
and recovery was until the runner was ready to go again. The third had a
different answer, so I asked the coach, who coached all three of these
runners, and the coach’s answer did not agree with the definitions of any of
the three runners. It seems the only point of agreement among these four
people was that interval training involves intermittent training, during
which there is some hard running and some recovery time.
I decided to develop my own definition based on the purpose of the type
of training being carried out. According to my studies in Sweden and in
graduate school, the most logical purpose of I training is to maximize
aerobic power (
 O2max), and believing that the best way to improve any
bodily function is to stress that function, I decided that the intensity had to
be at or very close to 
 O2max (and maximum heart rate), and the work-to-
rest ratio had to optimize that purpose.
Studies that Jimmy Gilbert and I did when developing the VDOT tables
allowed us to determine the duration a person can exercise at 
 O2max, and
that time is about 11 minutes. Obviously it is not desirable to make
individual work bouts that long, but because it takes about 90 to 120
seconds to build up to 
 O2max, from complete recovery, a good amount of
time to spend running at I pace is between 3 and 5 minutes. It can also be
less than 3 minutes, as explained in the next section.
--- PAGE 95 ---
Going for longer than 5 minutes would be too demanding because it is
difficult to run at 3K to 5K race pace a number of times when each of those
runs lasts more than 5 minutes. Also, by not allowing too long a recovery
between hard runs, 
O2 will not have recovered completely, and the next
work bout will allow reaching max in a shorter period of time, which is an
important determinant when using work bouts shorter than 2 or 3 minutes.
Reaching 
 O2max
Figure 4.2 shows how a runner achieves 
O2max when running at a speed
that elicits max. It takes about 2 minutes to reach 
O2max when starting out
at a resting 
O2. In addition to always being able to indicate the purpose of
every workout performed, it is wise to always try to gain the maximum
benefit out of the least amount of stress rather than trying to achieve the
maximum benefit out of the most amount of stress.
Figure 4.2    The rate 
O2max is achieved when running at 
O2max intensity.
--- PAGE 96 ---
Figure 4.3    The time it takes to achieve 
O2max when running above and at 
 O2max. 
O2max is
not achieved when running below 
O2max intensity.
Figure 4.3 depicts a good example of getting the most out of the least
effort. If a runner’s appropriate speed of running for an interval workout is a
pace of 5:30 per mile (292 meters per minute or 82.5 seconds per 400
meters), then running faster than an 82.5-second pace (for the first of five 5-
minute runs, for example) will not result in any more time at max than will
running at an 82.5-second pace. Working beyond your 
 O2max pace
(beyond v
 O2max) will not give you any more benefit relative to the
purpose of the workout.
In addition, running too fast on the first of five repeated 5-minute runs
may result in the second run just making an 82.5-second pace, but the last
three may all be slower than the proper pace because you wiped yourself
out working too hard on the first one or two. Further, no matter how much
you may be hurting during those later ones, which are too slow (because of
so much anaerobic work being done while overworking in the first one or
two), you are not spending any time at your max aerobic power.
The result is that you get about 3 minutes at 
 O2max in runs one and
two, but you get no time at max in runs three, four, and five. What was the
purpose of the workout? If it was to hurt, you accomplished the purpose,
but if you had planned to spend 15 minutes or so stressing your aerobic
maximum, you missed that completely.
--- PAGE 97 ---
As I have mentioned, it is good to normally use 3- to 5-minute work
bouts during an I workout because you are guaranteed some time at max,
even when it takes a minute or two to reach max. However, it is possible to
accumulate a fair amount of time at max even when running much shorter
work bouts, but you must keep the recovery time very short between the
harder runs.
Figure 4.4 shows how you could accumulate a good amount of time at 
O2max when using 1-minute work bouts at Interval pace. 
O2 doesn’t quite
reach 
O2max during the first I-pace run, but with short recoveries (about
45 seconds) after each run, the next run will be starting at an already
elevated 
O2, and it will take less time to reach max with all additional runs
that are followed by short recoveries. The result is that each additional run
will reach max rather quickly, and the overall time spent at 
 O2max will
accumulate to a fairly good number.
Figure 4.4    To reap the benefits of short interval training, the recovery periods must be kept even
shorter.
Adapted by permission from J. Karlsson et al., Energikraven Vid Lopning [Energy Requirements When Running]
(Stockholm: Trygg, 1970), 39.
It should now be clear that a person can stress the aerobic system using a
variety of workout durations that are ideally between 3 and 5 minutes each,
but the bouts can also be shorter if the recovery time is kept short (less than
the time at I pace that each recovery follows).
--- PAGE 98 ---
Running Hard
I training can also be performed by making the H runs just that—hard runs
and not necessarily any specific distance for time. For example, you might
run six 3-minute H runs, with each being followed by 2 minutes of recovery
jogging (jg). I would designate this workout as 6 × 3 min H with 2 min jg.
When doing H runs for time, rather than a particular distance for time, it is
expected that the H pace be one you subjectively feel you could maintain
for about 10 to 12 minutes if running for time.
My suggestion for how much I- or H-pace running to do in a single
session is to make the maximum the lesser of 10K or 8 percent of your
weekly mileage. So if you do 40 miles (64 km) a week, the recommended
maximum at I pace would be 3.2 miles (8 percent of 40). When doing H-
pace sessions, consider that 5 minutes of H running is equal to a mile for
keeping track of how many miles to accumulate in an I session. For
someone totaling more than 75 miles (120 km) per week, the maximum
amount at I pace would be the previously mentioned 10K (about 30
minutes).
I like to have runners more often do H-pace runs when at altitude, rather
than the more strictly designed I-pace efforts, because the speed of running
associated with maximum aerobic power at altitude is considerably slower
than it is at sea level, and this can be rather discouraging for a runner. Just
running hard and not really worrying about the actual speed effectively
stresses the central component of the aerobic system and eliminates the
worry about whether this is the optimal pace for the workout.
Another I-type workout many runners like is my step-count workout.
The standard variation of this workout is to start out running hard for 10
right footfalls, followed by 10 jogging right footfalls. Then you run 20 hard
and jog 20, followed by 30/30, 40/40, and so on, increasing by 10 each time
until you have run hard for 100 right footfalls and jogged for 100. Then you
repeat the 100/100 and come back down—90/90, 80/80, all the way back to
10 run and 10 jog.
This will take about 24 or 25 minutes to complete, and the distance
covered will be 3 or 4 miles. Of course a slower runner will cover less
--- PAGE 99 ---
distance, and a very good runner may total a little more, but all are spending
the same amount of time running hard and jogging, and time spent doing a
specific type of training is the best way to make things equal for runners of
different ability levels.
When doing an I session using the H-pace method, it is possible to vary
the time spent running hard during the session. For example, to total 20
minutes of H running, you might do either of the following:
2 × 4 min H with 3 min jg + 4 × 3 min H with 2 min jg
1 × 4 min H with 3 min jg + 2 × 3 min H with 2 min jg + 3 × 2 min
H with 1 min jg + 4 × 1 min H with 30 sec jg
I typically make the recovery jogs a little shorter than the H runs they
follow, but the recovery jogs could also be equal in time rather than shorter,
but never longer than the H running portion of the workout.
Another interval session that works well on windy days when it is not
easy to hit desired times for interval 1,000s, for example, is to run 20 × 200,
starting one each minute; this means if I pace is 40 seconds per 200, you get
only 20 seconds of rest before starting the next 200. Slower runners could
just limit recovery to a set amount of time (about half as long as the faster
runs). Table 4.3 shows a variety of I-pace and H-pace workouts to consider.
Table 4.3    Interval-Pace (I) and Hard-Pace (H) Workouts
Workout Total minutes
Training session A: for runners totaling up to 30 miles (48
km) per week
A1: 5-6 × 2 min H with 1 min jg (fartlek) 15-18 min
A2: 4 × 3 min H with 2 min jg (fartlek) 20 min
A3: 3 × 4 min H with 3 min jg (fartlek) 21 min
A4: 4-5 × 800 at I pace with 2 min jg 20-25 min
Training session B: for runners totaling 30-40 miles (48-64
km) per week
B1: 7-8 × 2 min H with 1 min jg (fartlek) 21-24 min
B2: 5 × 3 min H with 2 min jg (fartlek) 25 min
B3: 4 × 4 min H with 3 min jg (fartlek) 28 min
--- PAGE 100 ---
B4: 5-6 × 800 at I pace with 2 min jg 25-30 min
B5: 4-5 × 1,000 at I pace with 3 min jg 26-33 min
Training session C: for runners totaling 40-45 miles (64-72
km) per week
C1: 6 × 800 at I pace with 2 min jg 27 min
C2: 6 × 3 min H with 2 min jg (fartlek) 30 min
C3: 5 × 1,000 at I pace with 3 min jg 33 min
C4: 4-5 × 1,200 at I pace with 3 min jg 28-35 min
C5: 3-4 × 5 min H (can be 1 mile runs if I pace is under 5:00/mile)
with 4 min jg
27-36 min
Workout Total minutes
Training session D: for runners totaling 46-55 miles (74-88
km) per week
D1: 5-6 × 1,000 at I pace with 3 min jg 33-39 min
D2: 4-5 × 1,200 at I pace (or fartlek 5 × 4 min H) with 3 min jg 28-35 min
D3: 4 × 1 mile at I pace (or fartlek 4 × 5 min H) with 4 min jg 36 min
D4: 5 × 4 min H with 3 min jg (fartlek) 35 min
D5: 7 × 3 min H with 2 min jg (fartlek) 35 min
D6: 10 × 2 min H with 1 min jg (fartlek) 30 min
Training session E: for runners totaling 56-70 miles (90-113
km) per week
E1: 6-8 × 1,000 at I pace with 3 min jg 39-52 min
E2: 5-6 × 1,200 at I pace with 3 min jg 35-42 min
E3: 5 × 5 min H with 4 min jg (fartlek) 45 min
E4: 4 × 3 min H with 2 min jg (fartlek) + 4 × 2 min H with 1 min jg
(fartlek)
32 min
E5: 3 × 3 min H with 2 min jg (fartlek) + 4 × 2 min H with 1 min jg +
5 × 1 min H with 30 sec jg
35 min
Training session F: for runners totaling more than 70 miles
(113 km) per week
F1: 7-10 × 1,000 at I pace with 3 min jg 45-65 min
F2: 3 × 5 min H (can be miles if fast enough) with 4 min jg + 4 ×
1,000 at I pace with 3 min jg
54 min
F3: 6-8 × 4 min H (can be 1,200s at I pace if fast enough) with 3 min
jg
42-56 min
F4: 5-6 × 5 min H (can be miles at I pace if fast enough) with 4 min
jg
45-54 min
--- PAGE 101 ---
F5: 2 × 5 min H with 4 min jg + 3 × 3 min H with 3 min jg + 4 × 2 min
H with 1 min jg
48 min
F6: 5 × 2 min H with 1 min jg + 8 × 1 min H with 30 sec jg + 12 × 30
sec H with 30 sec jg
39 min
Training session G: treadmill hill interval sessions for
runners of all mileage amounts
G1: 20 × 30 sec at 5-6 mph/20% grade with 30 sec rests20 min
G2: 5 × 1 min at 5-6 mph/20% grade with 1 min rests + 10 × 30 sec
at 5-6 mph/20% grade with 30 sec rests
20 min
G3: 10 × 1 min at 6 mph/20% grade with 1 min rests 20 min
G4: 20 × 30 sec at 7 mph/20% grade with 30 sec rests20 min
G5: 5 × 1 min at 7 mph/20% grade with 1 min rests + 10 × 30 sec at
7 mph/20% grade with 30 sec rests
20 min
G6: 10 × 1 min at 7 mph/20% grade with 1 min rests 20 min
Could attempt G4, G5, and G6 at 7.5 or 8 mph
jg = recovery jogs after each run
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
REPETITION TRAINING
The primary purpose of R (repetition) training is to improve anaerobic
power, speed, and economy of running. Always remember what you are
trying to accomplish when doing an R (or any) workout. It makes sense that
if you want to improve your speed, you have to practice running fairly fast,
and it is particularly important to remember that in order to run fast, you
have to be recovered enough to run fast and with good technique. You don’t
want to be struggling while running fast, or good mechanics will be
sacrificed.
Some runners, and even some coaches, believe that if a good workout is
10 × 400 at 70 seconds each, with 3 minutes of recovery between the faster
runs, then 10 × 400 at 70 with only 2-minute recoveries would be a better
workout. I would argue that the latter could be a worse workout. Consider
the purpose of the workout—to improve speed and maintain good
mechanics while running fast. However, if you cut the recovery time, you
may not be adequately recovered to run 400s at 70 seconds with good
mechanics, and struggling is not accomplishing the purpose of the workout.
--- PAGE 102 ---
R sessions are not that conducive to a large group of runners training
together. Some in the group are faster than others and will finish and be
ready to go on the next run sooner, and if the slower runners are expected to
start each run with the faster runners, they (the slower ones) will be
struggling to keep up and in fact won’t be able to keep up. Guess what the
outcome of the workout is? The faster runners benefit and the slower
runners suffer and don’t accomplish the goal of the workout.
I encourage the distance runners on the team not to make fun of the
sprinters who totaled only 2 miles for the day when the distance runners
made it to 6 miles. Those sprinters need to spend lots of time recovering so
they can run fast and develop speed, and on cold days they need some extra
clothes to put on during the recovery time so they won’t freeze while
waiting for their next fast run. On cold days, even the distance runners may
need to put on a jacket between the faster runs to avoid getting cold.
For distance runners, I suggest a recovery time that is about two or three
times as long (in time, not in distance covered) as the faster R-pace runs
they are performing. Another way to determine recovery time in an R
session is to do an easy jog as far as the fast run just performed. For
example, when running R 400s, jog an easy 400 between the faster runs,
perhaps walking the final 10 or 20 meters before the next fast-run 400.
I suggest that the total amount of running to accumulate at R pace (in a
single training session) be the lesser of 5 miles (8 km) and 5 percent of
weekly mileage. For example, a runner totaling 30 miles (48 km) per week
would have a maximum of 1.5 miles (.05 × 30) at R pace for an R session.
However, for a runner doing more than 100 miles (160 km) per week, I
recommend keeping the maximum at R pace to 5 miles, and not 6 miles for
someone accumulating 120 miles (190 km), for example. Another rule of
thumb I like to follow is that single work bouts (faster runs at R pace)
should not last longer than about 2 minutes each, which means most true R
sessions will be made up of repeated 200s, 300s, 400s, 500s, and 600s for
most runners. Rep 800s may be OK if R pace is around 60 seconds per 400,
but that means we are talking about runners who are near or under 4
minutes for racing a mile.
--- PAGE 103 ---
It is always best to think in terms of time spent running at various
intensities, rather than distances covered, or else the slower runners on a
team end up spending considerably more time doing the workouts than do
the faster runners. In fact, a slower runner whose R pace is 90 seconds per
400 would spend 2 minutes more time (not to mention more footsteps and
more impact with the ground) running 8 × 400 at R pace than would a faster
runner doing 8 × 400 whose R pace is 65 seconds. If you think about it, this
slower runner may be better off doing just 6 × 400 at 90 seconds each; this
would match the total stress time of the faster runner who can complete 8 ×
400 in the same amount of total time.
As was provided for M, T, and I running, several R sessions are listed in
table 4.4.
Table 4.4    Repetition-Pace (R) Workouts
Workout
Total
minutes
Training session A: for runners totaling up to 30 miles (48
km) per week
A1: 8 × 200 R with 200 jg 16 min
A2: 2 sets of 200 R + 200 jg + 200 R + 400 jg + 400 R + 200 jg 16 min
A3: 2 × 200 R with 200 jg + 2 × 400 R with 400 jg + 2 × 200 R with 200
jg
16 min
A4: 4 × 300 R with 300 jg + 1 × 400 R 13 min
A5: 4 × 400 R with 400 jg 16 min
Training session B: for runners totaling 31-40 miles (50-64
km) per week
B1: 2 sets of 6 × 200 R with 200 jg (with 400 jg between sets) 27 min
B2: 3 sets of 200 R + 200 jg + 200 R + 400 jg + 400 R + 200 jg 24 min
B3: 4 × 200 R with 200 jg + 2 × 400 R with 400 jg + 4 × 200 R with 200
jg
24 min
B4: 6 × 400 R with 400 jg 24 min
B5: 2 × 200 R with 200 jg + 2 × 600 R with 600 jg + 2 × 400 R with 400
jg
24 min
Training session C: for runners totaling 41-50 miles (66-80
km) per week
--- PAGE 104 ---
C1: 2 sets of 8 × 200 R with 200 jg (with 800 jg between sets) 37 min
C2: 4 sets of 200 R + 200 jg + 200 R + 400 jg + 400 R + 200 jg 32 min
C3: 4 × 200 R with 200 jg + 4 × 400 R with 400 jg + 4 × 200 R with 200
jg
32 min
C4: 4 × 400 R with 400 jg + 8 × 200 R with 200 jg 32 min
C5: 8 × 400 R with 400 jg 32 min
C6: 2 × 200 R with 200 jg + 2 × 600 R with 600 jg + 4 × 400 R with 400
jg
32 min
Training session D: for runners totaling 51-60 miles (82-96
km) per week
D1: 2 sets of 10 × 200 R with 200 jg (with 800 jg between sets) 45 min
D2: 5 sets of 200 R + 200 jg + 200 R + 400 jg + 400 R + 200 jg 40 min
D3: 6 × 200 R with 200 jg + 6 × 400 R with 400 jg + 2 × 200 R with 200
jg
40 min
D4: 6 × 400 R with 400 jg + 8 × 200 R with 200 jg 40 min
D5: 2 × 200 R with 200 jg + 8 × 400 R with 400 jg + 2 × 200 R with 200
jg
40 min
D6: 10 × 400 R with 400 jg 40 min
D7: 2 × 200 R with 200 jg + 4 × 600 R with 600 jg + 3 × 400 R with 400
jg
40 min
D8: 3 × 200 R with 200 jg + 5 × 600 R with 600 jg + 2 × 200 R with 200
jg
40 min
D9: 2 × 200 R with 400 jg + 3 sets of 1 × 800 R with 400 jg + 2 × 200 R
with 400 jg
40 min
D10: 2 × 200 R with 200 jg + 2 × 800 R with 800 jg + 2 × 600 R with
600 jg + 2 × 400 R with 400 jg
42 min
D11: 2 × 200 R with 400 jg + 3 × 800 R with 800 jg + 3 × 400 R with
400 jg
43 min
D12: 5 × 800 R with 800 jg 40 min
Workout
Total
minutes
Training session E: for runners totaling 61-75 miles (98-120
km) per week
E1: 3 sets of 8 × 200 R with 200 jg (with 400-800 jg between sets)49 min
E2: 6 sets of 200 R + 200 jg + 200 R + 400 jg + 400 R + 200 jg 48 min
E3: 4 × 200 R with 200 jg + 8 × 400 R with 400 jg + 4 × 200 R with 200
jg
48 min
E4: 8 × 400 R with 400 jg + 8 × 200 R with 200 jg 48 min
--- PAGE 105 ---
E5: 4 × 600 R with 600 jg + 4 × 400 R with 400 jg + 4 × 200 R with 200
jg
52 min
E6: 3 × 600 R with 600 jg + 3 × 800 R with 800 jg + 3 × 200 R with 200
jg
51 min
E7: 2 × 800 R with 800 jg + 3 × 600 R with 600 jg + 2 × 400 R with 400
jg + 3 × 200 R with 200 jg
51 min
E8: 4 × 200 R with 200 jg + 5 × 800 R with 800 jg 48 min
E9: 2 × 800 R with 800 jg + 4 × 400 R with 400 jg + 8 × 200 R with 200
jg
48 min
Training session F: for runners totaling 76-80 miles (122-129
km) per week
F1: 4 × 200 R with 200 jg + 4 × 400 R with 400 jg + 4 × 800 R with 800
jg + 4 × 200 R with 200 jg
62 min
F2: 2 × 200 R with 200 jg + 2 × 800 R with 800 jg + 2 × 200 R with 200
jg + 4 × 400 R with 400 jg + 2 × 200 R with 200 jg + 2 × 800 R with 800
jg + 2 × 200 R with 200 jg
64 min
F3: 2 × 200 R with 200 jg + 3 × 800 R with 800 jg + 4 × 600 R with 600
jg + 2 × 400 R with 400 jg
64 min
F4: 2 × 800 R with 800 jg + 3 × 600 R with 600 jg + 4 × 400 R with 400
jg + 5 × 200 R with 200 jg
63 min
F5: 4 sets of 4 × 400 R with 400 jg (with 800 jg between sets) 79 min
F6: 4 sets of 8 × 200 R with 200 jg (with 400 jg between sets) 74 min
Training session G: for runners totaling more than 80 miles
(129 km) per week
G1: 5 sets of 8 × 200 R with 200 jg (with 400 jg between sets) 90 min
G2: 20 × 400 R with 400 jg 80 min
G3: 16 × 400 R with 400 jg + 8 × 200 R with 200 jg 80 min
G4: 4 × 200 R with 200 jg + 4 × 800 R with 800 jg + 6 × 400 R with 400
jg + 1 × 800 R with 800 jg + 4 × 200 R with 200 jg
80 min
G5: 3 sets of 5 × 200 R with 200 jg + 2 × 400 R with 400 jg + 1 × 800 R
with 800 jg (with 5 min between sets)
88 min
jg = recovery jogs after each run
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
TRACKING TRAINING INTENSITIES
Most distance runners are careful to record the total amount of mileage they
accomplish each week. This is useful information to keep track of because
--- PAGE 106 ---
it helps prevent overtraining and allows the runner to look back on previous
training and associated performances. I showed earlier that it is good to stay
with a particular amount of training stress for several weeks before
increasing the stress, but it is also a good idea to make note of how much of
the different types of stress are being included in an overall program.
The first step I took in trying to monitor types of stress was to get other
coaches and experienced runners to consider how to relate different
intensities of running with other intensities. For example, in terms of overall
training stress, how much running at I intensity would be equal to how
much running at T intensity? I arrived at some comparative multiplication
factors that allow a runner to compare different intensities, or speeds, of
running in terms of overall stress, and figure 4.5 summarizes this
information. For those who monitor heart rate during some training
sessions, I have left space where your typical heart-rate (HR) data
associated with different intensities of training can be entered. Entering HR
data will provide even more precise monitoring of training intensities.
E zone (easy runs): Although a variety of running speeds qualify as
E runs, I have assigned an average E run intensity as being worth .2
points per minute of running at a speed that represents 66 percent of
any runner’s VDOT. I consider E-zone running to range in intensity
from 59 percent to 74 percent of your VDOT value.
M zone (marathon-pace runs): These are usually performed
between about 75 percent and 84 percent of VDOT. For simplifying
the recording of stress associated with M-pace running, assign .4
points per minute.
T zone (threshold running): The next more intense zone is related
to typical T-pace running and represents running at intensities in the
mid- to upper-80 percent of VDOT values. T running is best for
improving the body’s ability to clear lactate and, in simple terms, is
great for improving endurance. I consider .6 points for each minute
as a simple point-calculation in the T zone.
10K zone: Some runners like to train in the 10K zone, which in my
way of looking at training, falls between T and I intensity of effort,
--- PAGE 107 ---
and for each minute in this zone, .8 points are awarded.
FIGURE 4.5
Points for Various Workouts
--- PAGE 109 ---
I zone (intervals): The I zone is best for improving aerobic power
and makes the body function at, or nearly at, 
 O2max. When
training in this zone, in most cases you can roughly consider each
minute at I intensity to be worth 1 point. The typical races
associated with the I zone are in the range of 2 miles to 5 miles (3
km to 8 km).
R zone (repetitions) and FR (fast repetitions): When running this
fast, you are working at an intensity that will always elicit
maximum heart rate if you stay at that speed of running for a couple
of minutes or longer. It is in the R zone that a runner spends time
working on speed, anaerobic power, and running economy. When
training in these zones, you can consider each minute at R intensity
to be worth 1.5 points and each minute at FR intensity to be worth
2 points. When you are training or racing at the 105 percent to 110
percent VDOT intensities (R), these running speeds are associated
with races that last about 4:40 to 7:00, which are close to what
many runners will race for 1,500 meters or 1 mile. When working at
about 115 percent to 120 percent of VDOT (FR), then you are
running at speeds more closely associated with 800-meter race
times.
Even if the relative values for times spent in the different zones may not
be perfectly accurate in relation to each other, the numbers provided could
be useful for logging training performed. For example, you might finish a
season having accumulated a total of 100 points in the I zone, and the next
season you will try for 110 points in that zone.
You can also see the total number of points (using the sum of all zones)
you accumulate each week, and next season you can try to increase that
number by a certain percentage—similar to increasing weekly mileage from
one season to the next. A possible starting point may be to suggest that
beginning high school runners try to accumulate 50 points a week and a
year or two later go for 100 points per week.
During college the point totals may go up to 150 points a week and to
200 or more points per week after graduation. No doubt, some runners will
--- PAGE 110 ---
be capable of accumulating more points than others while still avoiding
injury, just as is the case with total weekly mileage.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 111 ---
 
--- PAGE 112 ---
Chapter 5
VDOT System of Training
Set a realistic goal for every race you run.
Because of the great popularity, usefulness, and simplicity of the VDOT
training tables I have provided for runners and coaches over the past 35
years, it is useful to set aside a chapter of the book to describe the VDOT
system.
The term VDOT was originally used as a short form for the 
 O2max
value, to which it is related. When a person refers to 
 O2 (whether in
reference to a submaximal or maximal value of oxygen being consumed), it
is correctly pronounced “V dot O2” because there is a dot over the V
indicating that the volume, which the V represents, is a 1-minute volume.
Without a dot over the V, the volume represented may be measured over
more or less than 1 minute, so to make different volumes comparable, the
volume is converted to a 1-minute value. For example, if I collect a 30-
second bag of expired air from subject A, who is being tested on a treadmill
or track, the collected air volume may be 65 liters and the volume of
oxygen that this subject consumed during that 30-second collection may be
2,000 ml (2 liters). You could say the VE (volume of expired air collected
during that 30-second period) is 65 liters and VO2 consumption is 2,000 ml.
However, if another subject (subject B) had an expired air collection for
a period of 40 seconds, with a VE of 75 liters and a VO2 of 2,500 ml, it
would not be legitimate to say that B was breathing more air or consuming
more oxygen, because the periods of collection were for different amounts
of time.
By converting the volumes for both subjects to 1-minute values, the two
subjects can be better compared. In this example, A’s VE would be 130 liters
and B’s would be 112.5 liters. As for the comparable VDOT O2 values, A
has a 4,000 ml volume and B a 3,750 ml volume.
--- PAGE 113 ---
The point is that to properly compare different values, whether for
different subjects or the same subject under different conditions, the data
must first be converted to 1-minute values, and in the case of oxygen
consumption, the proper terminology is VDOT O2.
When Jimmy Gilbert and I used my collection data to generate the
original VDOT tables, we just referred to our calculated (pseudo) 
O2max
values as VDOT in the computer programs we wrote at that time. I also
want to add that Jimmy Gilbert is the person who wrote the programs. He is
a guy I coached in college and who later became a computer programmer
for NASA in Houston, Texas, where he still lives and has just finished
running his 100,000th mile, which amounts to running 38.6 miles (62.1 km)
per week for 50 years (he has, of course, quite carefully kept track of them
all). Our VDOT tables are the result of his careful attention to detail.
USING VDOT TO ESTABLISH
TRAINING INTENSITIES
The data we used in constructing the VDOT tables were gathered from
years of testing many runners of a variety of ability levels. The three most
important variables generated were 
O2max (that’s VDOT O2max), running
economy over a minimum of four submaximal speeds of running, and the
fraction of each runner’s respective 
O2max at which each runner
performed when racing over a variety of distances, more specifically, over a
variety of durations of time.
Figure 5.1 shows the representative economy curve that was the result of
all submax economy tests we ran, and figure 5.2 shows the curve that
represents the fraction of max that was associated with durations of races
run.
For example, using the regression equation that describes the curve in
figure 5.1, the typical aerobic (oxygen) demand for running at a 6 minute
per mile pace is about 51.7 ml per minute per kilogram of body weight.
Now if a runner ran a 5-mile race in 30 minutes (a pace of 6 minutes per
mile), then the formula that describes the curve in figure 5.2 says that the
fraction of VDOT O2max for a 30-minute race is .936 (93.6 percent of
--- PAGE 114 ---
max). So, if the cost of the race is 51.7 ml and the runner is working at 93.6
percent of max, then this runner’s VDOT (pseudo 
O2max) will be 51.7 /
.936, which equals 55.2.
Now and then a runner will contact me to say my VDOT tables gave him
a value of, say, 56.5, but in a recent lab test he was told his 
O2max was
61.6. I have no problem with this at all. Remember, our values are
dependent on a particular (representative) running economy, so this person,
with the measured max above the awarded VDOT value, is just not as
economical as our formula gave him credit for. If your lab-measured max is
less than we determine, then this means you are more economical than we
gave you credit for. No problem, because we use the same VDOT data and
some considerably more complicated equations along with your actual
performance times to calculate proper training intensities and to predict race
times for other distances.
Figure 5.1    Average economy curve and v
O2max associated with this curve and a 
O2max.
Adapted from J. Daniels, R. Fitts, and G. Sheehan, Conditioning for Distance Running: The Scientific Aspects (New
York: John Wiley and Sons, 1978), 31, by permission of J. Daniels.
--- PAGE 115 ---
Figure 5.2    Curve relating race time and fraction of 
O2max.
Adapted from J. Daniels, R. Fitts, and G. Sheehan, Conditioning for Distance Running: The Scientific Aspects (New
York: John Wiley and Sons, 1978), 31, by permission of J. Daniels.
Using a person’s race times gives a far better prediction of training
intensities and other race performances than do tests in the lab. Race times
reflect your max, your economy, your threshold, and your mental approach
to racing, all in one measure—the time it takes you to run a race.
Naturally, it is not as legitimate to use a time under perfect race
conditions to predict another race under poor conditions, and performance
in a mile is not as good a predictor of a marathon time as would be a half-
marathon time. Think of the VDOT values as good predictors of
physiological capability and they will do a great job when used to estimate
times for race distances for which you are currently training.
When we devised the VDOT tables, some world records were not as
great as the VDOT values predicted they should be. For example, for
women, the 1,500-meter and 3,000-meter world records at that time both
represented VDOT values of 71+, and the marathon record was associated
with a considerably lower VDOT value, which prompted us to say, “It can
be predicted that, based on relative VDOT values, women’s times in the
marathon will come down below 2:20,” which of course it has done.
--- PAGE 116 ---
Not a bad prediction at all, and all world records for men and for women
are quite close in VDOT values, with men’s times associated with VDOT
values that are a little more than 11 percent greater than are the women’s. It
is also true that a female runner with a 70 VDOT will outperform a male
runner whose VDOT is in the mid-60s. The higher VDOT value is
associated with the better runner, regardless of age or sex, simply because
VDOT represents performance in the first place.
Let’s face it, we already use performance to place marathon runners in
different starting boxes, with slower people farther back in the starting area.
We may as well use VDOT values to separate the runners; performance
over other distances could be used to determine starting points in a race that
the runners have not even run before.
Oxygen Power, the book that Jimmy Gilbert and I wrote in 1979,
contains 81 pages of VDOT tables for more than 40 different distances,
including values for distances run in meters, yards, kilometers, and miles,
and even for a 1-hour run time. Table 5.1 shows VDOT values for some
more popular race distances.
--- PAGE 118 ---
If you look up the relative VDOT values for several race times, it is
usually just fine to use your highest value when using the VDOT training
tables to determine the appropriate speeds at which to do different types of
training. Table 5.2 then lets you use the VDOT value that represents your
best recent performance in order to determine the appropriate paces for the
types of training that make up your current program.
For example, let’s suppose your best current performance is a 5:44 mile,
which from table 5.1 is associated with a 51 VDOT value. Then you go to
table 5.2 to get appropriate training paces for a 51 VDOT. Easy runs and
long runs (E pace) can best be performed at 4:52 to 5:29 per kilometer or
between 7:49 and 8:49 per mile, which should be very comfortable,
conversational running speeds.
--- PAGE 119 ---
The next couple of columns indicate the appropriate training speed for a
runner training for a marathon (M pace), with a current VDOT of 51 (M =
4:27 per kilometer and 7:09 per mile pace). For threshold training (T pace),
there are three columns describing the proper training paces, expressed in
times per 400 meters, per kilometer, and per mile. For the runner with a 51
VDOT, these T training paces would be 1:40/400, 4:11/km, and 6:44/mile.
When it comes to interval (I) training, remember that my
recommendation is not to include individual work bouts that are longer than
5 minutes. For this reason, the training speeds for various distances at I
pace will not be associated with any distances for which each individual run
will last longer than 5 minutes.
In the current example, which is for a 51 VDOT, 92/400 (3:04/800),
3:51/km, and 4:36/1,200 would be the right training speeds. It would not be
appropriate to run I miles because it would take more than 5 minutes to
complete a mile at the appropriate speed. You will see from the VDOT
training-intensity table that the lowest VDOT value that should be used in
running I miles is a 66.
A similar situation is associated with training at repetition (R) pace,
which is shown in the final five columns of the table. For our current
example of a person with a 51 VDOT, the proper R training speeds are
43/200, 64/300, and 86/400. With R training, it is not desirable to include
individual work bouts that last longer than 2 minutes, so it would be
pushing it a little to include 600s or 800s for a person whose VDOT is only
51. A 56 VDOT runner could include some R 600s in the program; a
runner’s VDOT would have to be about 77 or greater in order for 800-meter
R work bouts to be appropriate.
In all honesty, it is perfectly fine to go a little outside the recommended
ranges now and then, and a person with a 70 VDOT would probably not
have a big problem running R 800s in 2:10, which is not far outside the
suggested 2-minute maximum duration for R work bouts.
Daniels’ 6-Second Rule
When it comes to determining R training speed, of particular interest is how
close R pace is to mile or 1,500 race ability and the typical association
--- PAGE 120 ---
between R, I, and T training speeds. For example, a person with a 60
VDOT should have a current mile race time of about 5:00 (table 5.1 shows
a 4:57 mile), which is a pace of about 75 seconds per 400, and table 5.2 lists
a 75/400 pace as appropriate for 60-VDOT R training.
Now, if you follow a 60-VDOT runner’s training paces back to I and T
speeds in table 5.2, you will find I pace to be 81 seconds per 400 (6 seconds
slower per 400 than is the proper R pace for a 60 VDOT). Going to the T
column, you find the pace per 400 to be 7 seconds slower than is I pace for
this runner. Further, if you look down to higher VDOT values, you will find
that T pace is typically 6 seconds per 400 slower than I pace, and I pace is
6 seconds per 400 slower than R pace. I refer to this as my 6-second rule for
training, but it applies most accurately to better runners. However, you can
make it into a 7- or 8-second rule for runners in the 50 or 40 VDOT
categories.

--- PAGE 121 ---
The advantage of realizing the relationship between training paces for
the various types of training is that you can do a very good job of
determining all proper training paces if all you have to go by is a recent
mile or 1,500 race time. The mile or 1,500 pace for 400 is used for R pace,
and that pace can easily be converted to proper I and T paces without
having the VDOT tables in hand. There is also a faster R pace (which I
refer to as “fast rep” pace) that is part of training programs for 800-meter
runners, covered later in chapter 11.
Novice and Low-VDOT Training Intensities
It is becoming more and more popular to train for and participate in half
marathons and full marathons. I offer marathon training plans later in this
book for many levels of ability and fitness, including people who have little
or no running experience (see chapter 16). Many of these participants are
not able to find training paces associated with very low VDOT values, so I
have added an applicable VDOT table (table 5.3).
--- PAGE 122 ---
This table shows race times for 1 mile and 5,000 meters and their
associated VDOT values, followed by recommended training paces for
people who fit into this range of current performance categories. You will
notice that the final column shows M training paces and the total time for a
marathon associated with the VDOT values. For example, if your VDOT is
28 and you want to train for a marathon, M pace is 7:27 per kilometer and
12:02 per mile, and the total marathon time associated with that average
pace is 5 hours and 15 minutes.
ACHIEVING PERFORMANCE LEVELS
BASED ON VDOT AND AGE
CATEGORIES
Many coaches and young (even some not so young) runners have told me
they enjoy achieving higher and higher levels of performance based on
VDOT values. It has become somewhat common for me to hear, “Our cross
country team has a top five who all have a VDOT over 50,” which would
--- PAGE 123 ---
mean they have a top five who have all broken 20 minutes in a 5K race.
Some can say they have a top five all with a 60 VDOT or higher (17:03 5K
or faster).
What I have done to make this a little more interesting for young runners
is to calculate comparative VDOT values for male and female runners, with
basic increments of about five VDOT values per performance category.
Table 5.4 shows how male and female runners can be compared over 10
performance levels at several distances. So now a coach could say, “We
have seven level-6 girls on our team,” or “We have seven level-6 guys on
our team,” and so on. Naturally, having a bunch of level-7 or level-8
runners would be quite an achievement; there are probably not many level-9
runners on the same team, and level-10 types are few and far between.
My most recent calculations are associated with comparing
performances over a wide range of ages, based on research done on young
runners up through runners in their 70s. Naturally, to go a little beyond the
ages at which I have done tests, I have extrapolated from the ages that are
known, estimating that the rate of performance drop is fairly consistent over
the full range of ages. That way older (and younger) runners can have some
idea of how their performance at their current age may compare to others at
the peak running age categories of 18 to 38. Table 5.5 shows how relatively
young male (M) and female (F) runners can be compared over 10
performance categories, for VDOT and 1,600-meter times. Naturally, the
provided VDOT values can be looked up in table 5.1 for distances other
than the 1,600. You may have to do a little guessing for the proper race
times associated with the VDOT values that are not whole numbers. I have
not shown VDOT values for many younger runners, and you’ll see fewer
and fewer categories from ages 13 to 6. I want to avoid encouraging very
young runners to work too hard.
--- PAGE 126 ---
Looking at table 5.5, you can see that a 10-year-old girl would qualify
for level-6 ability with a 1,600 time of 7:18, which makes her equal in
quality to an 18-year-old girl with a 5:26 1,600 or a guy who has run 4:55 at
age 18.
Table 5.6 shows the VDOT values associated with different quality
levels for ages up to 80 years. I have ranked all participants from age 18 to
38 in the same fitness category, but from 39 on up, there is an adjustment
for each year of aging. Generally speaking, a VDOT of 3.5 is associated
with just lying down, and an easy walk may be associated with a VDOT of
about 10. This table suggests that a 58-year-old female runner who runs
1,600 meters in 7:00 is equal to a younger female runner (between 18 and
38 years of age) who runs 1,600 in 5:04. I am currently at level 7, which is
exactly where I was 15 years ago, and 40 years ago. I guess I am not
destined to move up to level 8.
--- PAGE 130 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 131 ---
 
--- PAGE 132 ---
Chapter 6
Environment- and Altitude-
Specific Training
Smile some during every race that you run.
Having lived in California, Montana, Colorado, Wisconsin, New
Hampshire, New York, Michigan, Georgia, North Carolina, Hawaii, Texas,
Oklahoma, and Arizona (hot Phoenix and altitude Flagstaff), plus Sweden,
Canada, and Peru, I feel fairly knowledgeable regarding how different
weather conditions and altitudes affect the sport of running. Different
runners experience temperature and altitude differently, so here is
information to help you train and race as well as possible in the heat and
cold and at altitude.
TEMPERATURE CONSIDERATIONS
First let’s consider racing under various conditions. The first thing that
comes to mind is that to be prepared for a race under adverse conditions, it
is beneficial to train under the same conditions where important races will
take place. If you live and train in ideal temperatures where it is seldom
cold enough to snow or so hot that you sweat out several pounds of water in
just an hour of running, you can usually predict your training and racing
outcomes fairly accurately. However, if you train in one type of weather and
will run an important race in different weather, preparation is needed, and
the best approach is to do some of your training under the type of weather
you’ll encounter during this race.
If you live in a fairly cool area and will race in a hotter climate, it is
advisable to sometimes train during the warmer time of day and maybe
even wear a long-sleeved T-shirt that heats your body. However, don’t try to
train a lot under adverse conditions because you will not be able to train as
--- PAGE 133 ---
hard as usual. In other words, don’t lose fitness while trying to train under
poor conditions all the time. Doing some of your training indoors on a
treadmill can help you adjust to warmer conditions because there is no wind
indoors to cool you.
Each time you go for a prolonged run, measure your undressed body
weight before and after the run and keep a chart tracking the time spent on
the run, air temperature during the run, weight lost relative to time running,
environmental conditions (e.g., cloud cover, wind), and how you felt during
the run. I conducted a study in which 32 runners raced 25K; runners tracked
their weight before and after the run and how much fluid they ingested
during the run. Air temperature was in the mid-80s and humidity was very
low. The results of two of the runners were notable. These two runners
finished the race within 1 minute of each other, both drank exactly 1 liter of
fluid, and their prerace body weight was within 1 pound of the other.
However, postrace weights showed that one runner had lost 3.5 pounds (1.6
kg) and the other had lost 8 pounds (3.6 kg). This is why I suggest that
everyone chart their pre- and postrace weight; over time your chart will
offer a reliable estimation of how different conditions affect your fluid loss
and perception of how the run is going. How you feel during the run is a
good indicator of how the conditions are affecting you. If you have personal
data to base your performance on, you won’t need to rely on a formula to
tell you how much to slow down on account of conditions.
When racing in unusually hot conditions, perform a moderate warm-up,
and cool down with a wet towel across your shoulders. Relax in a shaded
area and avoid time in the sun. Listen to your body telling you when it is
working too hard. When you warm up, you are warming up the running
muscles, and cooling the skin will not cool the muscles, so you won’t undo
your warm-up by cooling your skin. Consider wearing sunglasses, which
can help you relax your face muscles—and relaxing everything that can be
relaxed will help performance.
If you live in an area that doesn’t get cold, participating in a major race
during cold weather might produce a season-best performance, even if you
need to wear long sleeves and mittens. In fact, you can start the race in an
extra upper-body layer and mittens and discard them during the race after
--- PAGE 134 ---
you’ve warmed up. I ran my personal best marathon on a day that was 39 ºF
(4 ºC) and my mittens were off about 5 miles (8 km) into the race. Because
it was a clear, sunny day with no wind, it felt pretty warm. Without taking
in fluids during that marathon, I ended the race weighing 5 pounds (2.7 kg)
less than at the start. That 3 percent loss in body weight was not much for a
26-mile run. Runners living in areas that get very cold and experience
frequent snow should experiment with layering and outer garments during
training runs to learn how to dress for the conditions. I have found the
footing to be more secure when running over an inch or two (2.5-5 cm) of
snow than on the cleared-off street or sidewalk, which is frequently more
slippery than the snow.
Runners who live in areas that get very cold or hot should try to find an
indoor track or treadmill for training when the conditions are too extreme to
run outside. I coached a great runner who, for 12 weeks, did a weekly 20-
mile (32 km) run on his personal treadmill and placed second in the New
York City marathon with a time of 2:09. Running for 2 hours on a treadmill
must have made 2 hours over ground feel like the ideal situation.
ALTITUDE: THE BEST TRAINING
GROUND?
What do most runners want available to them at any training site? Usually
the things of importance are weather, training facilities, housing, food,
medical attention, and a friendly social atmosphere. If you have all these
things and are at altitude, is that better than all of these things at sea level?
Which would you rather have, all of these accommodations at sea level or
few or none of them at altitude? Would altitude be worth it if it is not a
desirable place to spend time training?
Altitude training has become a very popular topic of conversation among
distance runners and coaches. I am saddened when I hear a coach or athlete
say that if you can’t include altitude training in your program as a distance
runner, you may as well not even try being a great distance runner. I also
think this is a poor message to send to our youth, primarily because I don’t
believe it is a true statement that can be backed by facts.
--- PAGE 135 ---
If it is altitude that is associated with the best distance runners in the
world, then why aren’t there more great distance runners in several South
American countries, where altitude is part of daily life for many residents?
Maybe we should be penalizing youngsters from the Rocky Mountains in
the United States for not becoming better at running. After all, they grow up
and train at altitude during their early years.
Maybe we should spend more time looking at the successful runners and
trying to understand what all the great ones have in common. It might be a
good idea to consider social aspects or genetic characteristics. Maybe we
need to eliminate the idea that if we aren’t from a special place on earth, we
won’t ever have a great chance of being the best.
Former Olympian steeplechaser Emma Coburn, like many distance runners, has found Boulder,
Colorado, to be an ideal setting for altitude training.
The Effects of Altitude on Performance
When we attempt to analyze how any type of training affects performance
in any sport, it is important to understand the demands running places on
the human body. Is speed of greatest importance or strength and power, or is
it endurance that is primary in the sport in question? No doubt being at
altitude affects the body in a few different ways, and the following points
are worthy of consideration.
--- PAGE 136 ---
1. Performance in low-speed endurance events (e.g., running events that
last more than about 2 minutes) is slower at altitude than at sea level.
Relatively speaking, running over medium and long distances
involves slow movement against air resistance, and the slight benefit a
runner gains by moving through the less dense air at altitude does not
make up for the loss in aerobic power caused by lower amounts of
oxygen being delivered by the blood to the exercising muscles.
2. Performance in high-speed events, as in the case of sprints, whether of
short duration or prolonged, benefits from the less dense air
encountered at altitude. In other words, the reduced air resistance
more than makes up for the reduced pressure of oxygen.
3. With acclimatization to altitude (2 or more weeks), performance at
altitude will improve in endurance events. I have seen some runners,
after 3 weeks of acclimatization, race a mile at altitude more than 10
seconds faster than they were able to perform upon initial altitude
exposure. You must remember, however, that some improvement
comes through just learning how to run a race under altitude
conditions.
4. Regardless of the length of time available for altitude acclimatization,
low-speed endurance performance will never reach that which can be
achieved at sea level.
5. In addition, some researchers have reported that sea-level
performance will (or may) improve as a result of altitude training.
Consider the following situation, one that I and, I am sure, other
researchers have encountered: A group of runners have just finished a
spring semester in college, where they have been studying for final
exams; the weather is 90 degrees and 80 percent humidity. We take
them to altitude, where it is 80 degrees and 10 percent humidity, and
they have nothing to do but eat, sleep, and train, and upon return to
sea level they run new personal best times in a 5K race. Man, that
altitude sure is the answer, isn’t it? Was it being at altitude or all the
other things that changed during this time?
--- PAGE 137 ---
Relative to racing at altitude, there are two types of acclimatization that
take place with training at altitude (as mentioned in point 3); one is a
physiological acclimatization and one a competitive acclimatization. A big
difference between these two types of acclimatization is that the
physiological benefits, such as learning to ventilate larger amounts of air,
are lost after some time back at sea level, while much of the competitive
benefits are not lost, even after some weeks or months back at sea level.
In other words, once you have gone through the process of learning how
to race at altitude, that will stay with you fairly permanently; you tend to
remember how best to race in this environment. You could compare this to
learning to race a new distance. A 5K race is a fair bit different for a miler,
but after running a few 5K races, the runner will have adjusted to
competing at this distance.
I should clarify that in this discussion about altitude training and racing,
I am referring to moderate altitude, which is generally considered altitudes
between 1,200 and 2,500 meters, which are in the range of about 4,000 to
8,000 feet above sea level. Most of my studies and training of athletes at
altitude have been at elevations of about 2,130 to 2,255 meters (7,000 to
7,400 feet). There’s no question that 7,000 feet imposes almost double the
stress than does 5,000 feet because the real problems with altitude don’t
begin until about 3,000 feet above sea level, so going from 5,000 to 7,000 is
about the same as going from sea level to 5,000.
Upon arrival at altitude, one’s aerobic capacity (
 O2max) is reduced by
about 12 to 16 percent, but a runner’s performance is affected by only about
6 to 8 percent. This happens because the “cost” (aerobic demand) of
running is less at altitude compared to sea level, as a result of the less dense
air against which you are running. So you lose some in aerobic power but
gain some back in running economy.
Figure 6.1 shows sea-level and altitude economy curves, 
O2max values,
and v
 O2max values for a typical distance runner. It also shows why
runners lose only about half as much in performance and v
 O2max as they
lose in 
O2max values when at altitude.
--- PAGE 138 ---
Figure 6.1    The differences between altitude and sea-level running in terms of 
 O2max, economy,
and v
O2max.
Altitude Training and Racing Considerations
A usual question that athletes have when they decide to try altitude training
is how their training routines should be changed, if at all. I truly believe
there is no need to change the amount of training from what is typical at sea
level. For example, a runner who is used to accumulating 80 miles (129 km)
per week at sea level should be able to continue with that amount of
running upon arrival at altitude. Further, the same amount of time spent on
T, I, and R runs can also remain unchanged.
There is no need to reduce the time spent on any type of training because
the speed of the various types of training will be a little slower—relative to
a drop in aerobic power. With a reduction in aerobic power, all running
speeds are now related to a different maximum power that is less than what
was associated with sea-level running.
One type of training that should not have its speed adjusted when at
altitude is running at R pace. For repetitions, sea-level speed can be
matched when at altitude, but it may be necessary to increase the recovery
time between R runs. This will not spoil the benefits of the workout because
--- PAGE 139 ---
with repetitions, the idea is to work on speed and economy, so adjust
recovery to allow the usual practice of speed and economy.
Incorporating Altitude Training
As someone who has competed, trained, performed research, and coached
distance runners at altitude (and at sea level), here are the altitude training
considerations I have learned:
1. I like training at altitude, with intermittent exposures to sea level for
some days at a time, and even some exposure to higher altitudes now
and then. The air is usually clean, dry, and cool, and in many cases,
just going for an E run is more enjoyable than at sea level because of
the very desirable weather conditions. It is not unlike having a
refreshing cold front arrive in a typically warm and humid part of the
country. For normal sea-level residents, training at altitude in the
summer usually gets them away from hot, humid weather and places
them in cooler and dryer training conditions. It is always a good idea
to let your breathing pattern dictate how hard you are working when
on an E run; are you breathing at a rate of perceived exertion that is
no more stressful than is typical at sea level?
2. If you are a normal sea-level resident, there is no need to reduce your
training mileage upon initial exposure to altitude. However, don’t
immediately increase your mileage just because you have more
available time. In other words, do normal amounts of training and
increase mileage as you generally would when at sea level.
3. Run at normal sea-level speeds in R workouts, but maybe take a little
longer time to recover between individual runs. With true I sessions,
slow the speed of longer intervals by 3 or 4 seconds per 400 and take
normal amounts of recovery. Also, slow T pace by about 12 to 16
seconds per mile (8 to 10 sec/km). During E and L runs, go by feel
and use a normal breathing pattern.
4. To race your best at altitude you need to get in some practice altitude
races so you become competitively acclimatized, even if this must be
accomplished some months before the actual altitude competition.
--- PAGE 140 ---
5. Think of altitude training as one of several types of training stress to
which you have access. I have found that many runners who train at
altitude experience more discomfort than they did at sea level and
therefore learn how to hurt and are better able to manage discomfort.
6. It is wise to allow for adaptation to sea-level conditions after altitude
training so that your body is adjusted to sea-level conditions. I often
hear runners say they must compete almost immediately upon arrival
back at sea level to do their best, but this is not so, especially if they
had a few intermittent sea-level exposures when training at altitude.
7. Performance benefits that result from training at altitude should not be
considered transient in nature. Many athletes have raised their level of
fitness a notch through altitude training and maintained that
performance capability even months after returning to sea level. The
key is to maintain what has been accomplished through new levels of
stress in the overall training program. In other words, if your
performances have improved as a result of altitude training, your body
has made improvements and as long as your new level of fitness
continues to be stressed—with increased speeds of training back at
sea level—you will not lose that ability. It is no different from
realizing an improvement as a result of increasing weekly mileage;
however, you have to continue stressing the body according to its
fitness level, regardless of how the improved fitness was achieved.
8. Believe in altitude training if you decide to try it, but if it doesn’t
work, don’t hesitate to make a change.
9. It is common for distance runners to fare better their first day at
altitude than a few days after arrival. There is often a fair amount of
dehydration during the first several days at altitude, and it is important
to drink plenty of fluids, which helps maintain blood volume. It is also
important to get regular rest.
10. There appears to be a stress adaptation during continued exposure to
altitude that is sped up by intermittent exposures to sea level. A study
of adrenaline and noradrenaline values, measured through the
--- PAGE 141 ---
collection of daily 24-hour urine samples, suggested that several days
back at sea level reduced the daily stress levels upon return to altitude.
11. For lowlanders who are training at altitude for the purpose of
preparing for a subsequent competition at altitude, it is beneficial to
perform a time trial or race upon acute altitude exposure, which is in
contrast to what is often recommended. The benefit of this trial effort
is to face reality as soon as possible and therefore be more accepting
of the changes that need to be made to race well at altitude. Further, a
second test a couple of weeks later will invariably show an
improvement in performance, and this is a real psychological boost—
proof that progress is being made.
12. Training at altitude can be of the normal amount and relative intensity
without initially being more demanding than sea-level training. In an
attempt to maintain normal speed during repetition workouts,
remember that it is sometimes necessary to take longer periods of
recovery after each faster run. If speed and economy of running are
the purposes of a training session, then the runs being performed need
to accomplish those purposes.
13. It is possible that endurance athletes training at altitude will not only
adapt to altitude but also make a step up in fitness. If this is true, then
it is not at all unusual to see sea-level as well as altitude performances
improve.
Maintaining Speed at Altitude
Remember, you must always be able to answer the question “What is the
purpose of this workout?” No matter where you are, there are five
intensities of training: E (easy) runs, M (marathon-pace runs, mostly for
marathon specialists), T (threshold pace), I (interval pace), and R
(repetition pace). Let’s look at how altitude affects each of these types of
training.
--- PAGE 142 ---
Achieving worldwide competitive and record-breaking times in events ranging from the 800-meter
event to the half marathon, Bernard Lagat used altitude training and a “keep fresh” approach to
maintain a phenomenally high level of success over a two-decade running career.
It is generally accepted that steady, prolonged runs at comfortable paces
elicit tremendous benefits. Faster running is also employed for parts of a
training season in order to stress various components of the overall
physiological and biomechanical makeup of the human body. Resistance
training is often included, as are bounding drills and uphill runs, for the
purpose of improving leg power. Faster runs of relatively short duration are
included in the program to develop speed, power, and an economical
running technique at faster racing speeds. T-pace runs and I runs are also
--- PAGE 143 ---
included for the purpose of improving endurance and stressing the aerobic
system to its limit.
The question is, during which type of training is the athlete being
cheated in terms of leg power or speed? It certainly isn’t that easy
prolonged intensity of running that makes up about 85 percent of a week’s
total mileage. These E runs are performed at about 59 to 74 percent of 
O2max, and if altitude makes you do a typical 60 percent effort at 68
percent of your reduced altitude max, then you are still moving along at the
same pace. Further, I doubt that leg power or speed is associated very
closely with running at 70 percent of max, so there is no difference relative
to E runs.
Now consider the fast R training that is part of the program. It is well
accepted that you can run faster at altitude than you can at sea level for
short periods of time. The runs typically used in R sessions are about 30
seconds to 90 seconds, an amount of time that altitude doesn’t negatively
affect as long as you take adequate recovery time between runs; one of the
purposes of repeating faster runs is to work on good mechanics and good
speed, and to accomplish these goals you need to take adequate rest.
This brings us to longer I and T runs as the only types of training in
which speed is typically slower at altitude than at sea level. Keep in mind
that even in a training phase when these types of training are being
emphasized, it is unusual for an athlete to set aside more than about 10
percent of a week’s training for these types of quality work. Also, remember
that the primary purpose of T running is to teach the body how to better
clear lactate from the system, and if that can be done at a little slower pace
at altitude, the purpose of the workout is still being accomplished.
When it comes to the intervals that are a little slower at altitude, the
purpose is to stress the aerobic system to its maximum, and certainly the
central components (the lungs, heart, and blood vessels to deliver blood and
oxygen to the exercising muscles) of this system are working as hard at
altitude as they do at sea level. Even though the cells do not receive as
much oxygen for aerobic metabolism at altitude as they do at sea level, they
are working as hard as they can with what they do have to work with.
--- PAGE 144 ---
Further, for anyone who is worried about losing speed or leg power
because of a slower pace during 
 O2max I work, it would be fairly easy to
find a slight downhill course for maintaining sea-level speed or to schedule
this phase of training for a time when not at altitude. Personally, I think the
learn-to-hurt aspect of intervals at altitude more than makes up for the
slightly slower pace at which they are often performed.
An additional point about reduced intensity of training at altitude relates
to overtraining and dealing with injury. I have seen several distance runners
actually benefit from the reduced training intensity that altitude imposes
during T runs and I workouts. There are a couple of reasons for this:
Many athletes train faster than is necessary to achieve a particular
benefit, and at altitude they are reduced to a slower pace that is
actually just right for them.
Runners who are nursing minor injuries often find themselves
injury free after a couple of weeks of training at altitude, where they
must reduce the speed at which they are doing some of their runs.
What sometimes appears to have a negative impact on a person’s training
can become a positive one.
Racing at Altitude
When races are scheduled during a runner’s time at altitude, there must be
an adjustment in how the races are run. Most important is to avoid going
out too fast at the beginning of a distance race, and by too fast, I mean don’t
try to match the speed you are used to going out for a sea-level race of the
same distance.
Table 6.1 shows some approximate time adjustments for race durations
at various altitudes. This will give you an idea of how much to adjust the
pace of a race you are running at altitude for the first time. The times shown
in table 6.1 are for runners who have spent some time at altitude, and if you
are running an altitude race with no time for acclimatization, the pace will
have to be a fair bit slower than what is shown in this table. The time to put
a little more into an altitude race (if you think you are not working too hard)
is after you are at least halfway into the race.
--- PAGE 145 ---
Sometimes runners will need to go all out at an altitude site. This doesn’t
happen often in championship races, but it is fairly common in races of
moderate importance. The questions of considerable concern are as follows:
1. How much slower should times be at altitude?
2. What is the best approach to racing at altitude?
In answer to the first question, refer to table 6.1, which associates
altitude and race duration with how much slower you might expect to run
for different races.
In answer to the second question, the two most important factors are the
duration of the altitude race and the best approach to attacking the race. It is
pretty well known that short races are not affected by altitude, and by short,
I mean up to and including an 800-meter distance. It may hurt a little more
than usual, but in a serious race you should perform the 800 at just about
the same time you are used to running at sea level. In fact, in the 1968
Olympics in Mexico City, the winner (a sea-level native) of the 800 tied the
Olympic record in the final of that race.
Obviously, tactics can play a major role in an altitude race, but aside
from tactics, the best approach to a distance race at altitude is to be a little
overly cautious during the early minutes of the race. Going out as fast as at
sea level will definitely demand a greater amount of anaerobic energy,
which will surely lead to a slower latter part of the race.
Alternating Between Altitude and Sea Level
Distance runners generally improve their altitude performances a
considerable amount over a 2- or 3-week period of training at altitude.
--- PAGE 146 ---
Greater improvement is realized when runners periodically train or race at
sea level during a series of altitude stays. Getting back to sea level now and
then helps athletes realize they have not lost their usual sea-level ability
from being at altitude for prolonged periods.
For sea-level runners who have an opportunity to spend time at altitude,
it is beneficial to switch back and forth between altitude and sea level.
Going up and down daily is not necessary, but a few weeks at altitude
followed by a week or so at sea level and then back to altitude works well.
A major benefit of this approach is that going down for a few days can give
a psychological boost when you realize you haven’t lost any fitness, as
some of your altitude training sessions may be suggesting. In fact, during a
few days at sea level you often can perform better than in previous sea-level
outings.
I often refer to this advantage as having “learned to hurt” when at
altitude, and that same level of hurt is now associated with a little faster
time than previously run at sea level. In fact, I believe that one of the most
significant benefits of spending time training at altitude is that you do learn
to hurt a little more.
Naturally, once the idea of going back to sea level for extended training
time is mentioned, then the topic of losing fitness upon return to sea level
usually surfaces. You sometimes hear that you have only a few days back at
sea level before losing what you may have gained while at altitude. I tend to
think this is not the case at all.
Think of it this way—if while at altitude you increased your level of
fitness, this simply means you are fitter than before, not that you are just
temporarily fitter than before. I suppose you could compare it to increasing
your mileage, and after some weeks of higher mileage you race better
(some fitness factor has improved). As long as you continue to stress the
necessary systems, there is no need to believe you will lose fitness because
you back off a little in mileage.
The reason people say that after a few weeks back at sea level you will
lose performance ability gained at altitude is that this is often the case; but
why? Very often, runners go to altitude to prepare for a specific sea-level
championship. They come down and compete, and then many of them are
--- PAGE 147 ---
finished for the season; so have they lost fitness because they came back to
sea level or because they quit training?
I have had athletes leave after a month at altitude, travel to race in
Europe, and return to altitude where they raced faster (at altitude) than
before they left for Europe. One runner spent 6 weeks at altitude and went
home to set a personal best time in the 5K. He stayed at sea level for the
next 10 months, during which time he ran many personal bests and was
national champion and Pan American Games champion in his event,
without ever returning to altitude, and he did go faster with more time back
at sea level. For years I have argued that it is not unusual to see an
endurance athlete leave the rigors of sea-level life (heat, humidity, possible
study or job demands, or personal stresses), go to altitude for a period of
training, and upon return to sea level, record significant improvements in
performance.
Racing at Sea Level After Training at Altitude
It usually takes a couple of weeks at altitude to see altitude performances
improve. In terms of the best time to race on return to sea level, there seems
to be a fair bit of variation among athletes. One factor that affects how long
back at sea level will produce the best sea-level performance is weather.
Altitude weather is typically cool and dry, and if you return to sea level and
have to race in warm, humid conditions, it may be best to give yourself a
week or more to adjust to that type of environment. On the other hand, if a
sea-level competition happens to be in cool, dry conditions, then you may
be ready for a great race as soon as you come down from altitude.
How long you should be back at sea level before racing also varies with
the event in question. In general, I believe that the longer the race, the
longer you need to be down at sea-level conditions in order to perform your
best.
One of my altitude subjects, an outstanding runner and close friend
named Jim Ryun, ran a world-record mile (3:51.1 on June 23, 1967) on the
evening of the day he returned to sea level after 3 weeks at altitude and
another world record in the 1,500 (3:33.1) a day after returning to sea level.
Keep in mind these are fairly short races, and one thing that tends to happen
--- PAGE 148 ---
on return to sea level after time at altitude is that you hyperventilate—
breathe more than is necessary—because at altitude you definitely increase
your breathing volume, and it takes some days back at sea level to realize
you don’t need to breathe quite so much. However, in a relatively short
race, such as a 1,500 or mile, the race is pretty much over by the time you
realize how hard you are breathing.
At the other end of the distance spectrum—the marathon—sea-level
conditions can be very stressful compared with what you have been dealing
with at altitude, especially in terms of heat and humidity. At altitude it is
almost always dry and cooler than at sea level, and if you travel to a sea-
level marathon and it is warm and humid, your body will not respond well
to those conditions for 10 to 14 days. Also, over a number of days, your
breathing will settle down and things will feel much more comfortable.
For most other distances that are longer than the mile, a week or even
more is probably better than just arriving at sea level in time for a race,
especially when weather conditions differ from what was typical at altitude.
Runners who have made several trips to sea level during a phase of training
at altitude will generally have a better idea of how to prepare for a sea-level
race than those who have spent considerable time at altitude with few or no
intermittent trips to sea level.
I recommend making these sea-level trips for as much as a week at a
time, both for the mental and physiological benefits that time at sea level
can provide. Table 6.2 shows effects of various temperatures on two
marathon race times.
--- PAGE 149 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 150 ---
 
--- PAGE 151 ---
Chapter 7
Treadmill Training
Training doesn’t have to be uncomfortable to
produce beneficial results.
Most of us like to think that one big advantage runners have over other
athletes or, more simply stated, that running has over many other types of
aerobic exercise is the simplicity and freedom of the sport. You really can
run just about anywhere and for free. So why do treadmill training?
I remember coaching a sailor during the Gulf War who was 6 feet, 4
inches tall (1.9 m) and weighed 185 pounds (84 kg). He maintained an 80-
mile-per-week (129 km) running program for most of the year that I trained
him. This sounds reasonable enough for someone training for a marathon,
but when you consider that he was limited to doing all his training on the
decks of his aircraft carrier, treadmill running doesn’t seem quite so limiting
after all.
Some inmates I worked with at a state prison held an annual marathon
within their prison walls. The course was a 1-mile (1.6 km) loop that
changed surfaces each loop, from grass to asphalt to dirt to cement. One of
the guys averaged 40 miles (64 km) a week in that yard. Another runner I
coached a few years ago ran from home to work and back each day (in New
York City, by the way). On very cold and windy days he sometimes got a
ride home, and on those days he ran in place for up to an hour and a half in
his living room to make sure he wasn’t cheating himself out of mileage.
Then there was the law student I used to watch run around the 400-meter
track just outside our lab when I was studying in graduate school. He
seemed to go on forever, every day. I finally went down to meet him one
day, and we ran together for a few miles while we talked. It turned out that
he ran 80 laps on that track 6 days each week. His head was shaved, he
wore high-top basketball shoes (with two pairs of heavy wool socks), and
--- PAGE 152 ---
red cotton shorts, nothing more. Rumor had it that on really cold days he
would put on a T-shirt, but I never saw that myself. Understand that this
was in March in Michigan, not Arizona or some other nice, warm southern
state. When I asked the 80-laps-per-day guy why not fewer laps at a little
faster pace, he said, “No, the purpose of my running isn’t to get in shape;
the purpose is to have some time to myself, away from my studies.” This
sure makes treadmill running seem like the most humdrum running
experience you could possibly have.
Let me offer a few more experiences when treadmill running may be a
good idea. How about Phoenix in July? Or Minnesota (or Cortland, New
York) in February? Atlanta in August?
What a media event it could be to get the top marathoners in the world
all face-to-face in a big gymnasium on their own treadmill. The room is
held at a constant temperature of 55 ˚F (or about 15 ˚C) and 30 percent
humidity. The gun goes off and the winner is the one who logs 42,195
meters (26.22 miles) the fastest. Competitors are free to change the
treadmill speed at any time and to eat and drink at will or visit a nearby
toilet or hop on a scale to check their body weight to keep an eye on water
loss.
The bottom line is that treadmill running can be useful for all runners,
not only on days of adverse weather, but even on nice days when there is a
need for control or during injury rehabilitation. There is a lot you can do on
a treadmill with minimal boredom.
One of the biggest advantages of treadmill running is that you can
accurately control intensity. With overground running in nice weather
conditions, intensity can be controlled only by changing running speed. On
the treadmill, practically unlimited combinations of speed and grade can be
employed to subject the runner to the desired intensity of exercise. You can
run at a pretty slow pace, but with the right grade set on the treadmill, the
task can be made equal to the energy demand of just about any speed you
want the demand to be.
Possibly the greatest disadvantage of treadmill running is not being able
to share your run with a partner or group of other runners. However,
workouts in which two runners alternate time on and off the treadmill can
--- PAGE 153 ---
be beneficial. For example, if a treadmill workout involves running for 1
minute up a tough grade followed by a 1-minute rest (off the treadmill), two
runners can alternate running and resting by just hopping on and off the
treadmill when it is their turn. I have done this with my college teams for
many years, with considerable success.
On the other hand, some people, me included, like to be by themselves
on some runs, and treadmills can provide this atmosphere. I remember a
period of time when I used to arrive about an hour early to work at a lab
where I did a lot of treadmill testing to get in an hour of treadmill running
before anyone else arrived. No matter how I ran, how I breathed, or how I
carried my arms or legs, the one thing I did know was the speed at which I
was running and how far I had gone. What could be simpler, or more
relaxing, than that?
Treadmill training by no means has to be limited to steady running at a
pace where the stress level is conducive to falling asleep. By the way,
instead of wearing a wristwatch, I have always preferred a large wall clock,
with a large sweep second hand, located off to one side where I can’t see it
unless I turn my head in its direction rather than in front of me where I have
to watch every minute go by. You can use the clock to track work and rest
and the sweep second hand to take heart rate readings if you are so inclined.
If you are going to give up the freedom of an outside run for time on a
treadmill, rid yourself of carrying excess baggage. Not even a shirt (or
shorts, for that matter) is necessary if you are on your own treadmill at
home.
--- PAGE 154 ---
One of the foremost U.S. triathletes in history, Hunter Kemper found the treadmill to be a valuable
training tool, as do many elite and nonelite distance event athletes throughout the world.
STEADY RUNNING AND
INTERMITTENT RUNNING
There are only two types of training a person can do: steady running and
intermittent (work/recovery) running. By steady running I mean nonstop
running at a consistent intensity. The intensity may be very easy, as at the
beginning of a warm-up, during a postworkout cool-down, or as recovery
from harder intermittent work bouts, or it may be moderate, as when
running at M pace or T pace.
Any intensity greater than T pace will usually be associated with
intermittent running, such as during I or R workouts, types of training that
stress the cardiovascular system to its maximum, or that work on
mechanics, speed, and economy. Intermittent training simply means the
workout is done by mixing bouts of hard work with bouts of recovery,
which may or may not involve light work. Usually, the harder you work, the
more time you take for recovery, and on a treadmill this is easy to control. A
single training session can also involve a mixture of intensities and
--- PAGE 155 ---
durations of running with varying bouts of recovery, typically referred to as
fartlek training.
HILL TRAINING
A big advantage treadmill running has over ground running is in the area of
hill training. Overground hill work invariably involves both uphill and
downhill running, which can be good if that is what you want. However,
often a runner wants the benefits of uphill running without the negative
aspects of running back down for the next uphill run, and this can be easily
accomplished on a treadmill, where you can run up for a period of time and
then just hop off the treadmill for recovery before the next uphill run. This
uphill-only running can be desirable for a runner who is nursing an injury
that is aggravated by downhill landing shock but not by running uphill
because of the reduced impact. It is possible to complete demanding
workouts at a slow pace provided the grade is steep enough.
Runners who want to prepare for a race that involves a good deal of both
uphill and downhill running, as is experienced in the Boston Marathon, for
example, can use the treadmill to train for both uphill and downhill running.
To provide a downhill situation on a typical treadmill you can place stout
boards (I use railroad ties) under the back support. For example, if you have
a treadmill that goes up to a 20 percent grade and you place a block of
wood under the rear so that it reads a 5 percent grade when a carpenter’s
level shows the treadmill belt to be 0 percent, then you know you can go
down to −5 percent if you set the dial at 0. You will then have a treadmill
that can go from a −5 percent to +15 percent grade. The important factor in
performing this grade adjustment is to make sure your treadmill is solidly
attached to the supporting block or blocks so that vibration or an
unsuspecting person doesn’t knock it off its block.
A word of caution about downhill running. Just as uphill running reduces
landing shock, so does downhill running increase landing shock. It is wise
to add bouts of downhill running gradually. Spend about 4 weeks at one
setting before increasing the grade or speed to a more demanding setting.
Downhill running can easily increase quadriceps muscle soreness if you are
going too fast or running down more than just a few degrees of grade.
--- PAGE 156 ---
Avoid increasing the stress of downhill running during the final couple of
weeks before a race, and don’t initiate downhill running during the final 4
to 6 weeks before an important race.
Always experiment with any new type of training during the off-season
or early in the start of a prolonged training cycle. The majority of treadmill
training is either on a level or moderate positive grade for most people, and
negative-grade running need not be of concern for average, or even elite,
runners, except when planning to race on a course that has downhill
sections.
TREADMILL TRAINING INTENSITY
In an effort to minimize boredom and to provide more variety to treadmill
training, I have prepared a table of intensities that allows a runner to use a
variety of speed and grade combinations to impose the desired stress on the
body. One of the big advantages of using this intensity table is that it allows
runners to achieve the desired training stress without running fast all the
time. Some treadmills will not go fast enough to provide for ideal interval
training, but by adding a grade, the desired benefit can be accomplished.
Table 7.1 shows the grade that, if applied at the mph speed shown at the
top, will produce an effort equal to running at the pace shown at the left of
the table, in the mile column. For example, a 6:11 mile pace could be
accomplished by running at 6 mph on a 10.2 percent grade, or 7 mph at a 7
percent grade, or 9.5 mph at a 2.3 percent grade. A 4:13 mile effort (63-
second 400-meter effort) could be done at 6 mph at a 21.2 percent grade, or
any of the other combinations shown in that row, ending with 12 mph at a
4.3 percent grade. The various mile paces were chosen as representative of
aerobic capacity, in increments of 5.
--- PAGE 157 ---
Although it is possible to get equivalent work done at slow speeds and
steep grades, it is better to use faster speeds when attempting to do
comparative R training. The treadmill is best for I-type training, T training,
and steady runs. I think very good I workouts are done at steep grades and
slower speeds. You can try doing 20 runs of 30 seconds each with 30-
second rests, and if that is not too demanding, try 10 runs of 1 minute each
with 1-minute rests. An advantage of doing 30/30 or 60/60 second work/rest
bouts is that two people can share the same treadmill if both want to work at
the same intensity. Doing this means one runner is running while the other
is resting, and both just hop on or off every 30 or 60 seconds, depending on
the program they are using. Also, adding 1 percent to the treadmill grade is
similar to increasing the speed of running by about 10 to 15 seconds per
mile.
It is also possible for each runner who uses a treadmill to create his or
her own intensity table. Each time you train on a treadmill, try different
combinations of speed and grade and record how demanding each
--- PAGE 158 ---
combination feels. I suggest starting at 6 mph and 2.5 percent grade, then 6
mph at 5 percent grade, then try 6 mph at 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, and finally
20 percent grades. In a different training session, try 7 mph at a variety of
grades, then 8 mph, 9 mph, and 10 mph with whatever you can handle on
your treadmill. For each combination of speed and grade, run for a steady 5
or 6 minutes and during the final minute of each run, record a number from
1 to 5: 1 = very easy, 2 = some demand, 3 = comfortably hard, 4 = hard, and
5 = very hard or maximal effort. Figure a 1 rating equals what you could
easily do for an L run, 2 = about M pace, 3 = T pace, 4 = about 5K race
effort, and 5 = about what you might be able to handle for 5 to 6 minutes.
Don’t try to perform many of the speed and grade combinations in the same
session, but after doing as many as you can handle, make a table showing
the combinations that are suitable for you when trying different workouts.
Once you fill out your table, which will take weeks to achieve, and start
doing a couple sessions per week, keep in mind that what feels difficult at
first may become easier as time goes by, so be willing to change what you
use for different training intensities.
Performing a ministudy like this makes treadmill running meaningful
and time flies by. You tend to concentrate on your rating system rather than
how much work you are doing. Heart rates can also be checked and
recorded with each speed and grade combination, which will give additional
information when deciding on a particular workout. Use the following
heart-rate rankings: 1 = up to 80 percent of max HR, 2 = 81 to 85 percent of
max, 3 = 86 to 90 percent of max, 4 = 91 to 99 percent of max, and 5 = max
HR, or about equal to current mile race pace effort.
TREADMILL CALIBRATION
If you are like me, you want to be accurate in knowing how fast you are
running, particularly when doing I, T, or other quality workouts. This
requires calibrating your treadmill, which is done as follows.
1. With the treadmill power off, make a mark on the side of the running
belt with a small piece of white tape. Lay a measuring tape on the
belt, starting at this mark. Push the running belt slowly around,
--- PAGE 159 ---
making small pencil marks when needed to adjust the tape and remind
yourself of the accumulating distance being measured. Continue
measuring until you reach the starting mark and record the total
distance to the nearest quarter inch, or .5 centimeter. If you are
measuring in feet and inches, convert the total inches to centimeters
by multiplying the total inches by 2.54 (there are 2.54 centimeters per
inch). If you are using metric measurements, record the total distance
in centimeters. Let’s say, for example, that you end up with a running
belt that is 542.9 centimeters.
2. Convert the centimeter distance to meters by dividing the centimeter
distance by 100. Example: 542.9 / 100 = 5.429 meters in the example
just given.
3. Multiply belt length by 10 to get the distance (D) traveled in 10 belt
revolutions. Example: D = 5.429 × 10 = 54.29 meters.
4. Place an identifying mark on the edge of the belt using something like
duct tape at the place where you started your measurements from. You
should be able to see this mark when the belt is moving fast.
5. The speed of the treadmill is determined by timing 10 revolutions of
the belt, as follows.
a. With the belt moving at the speed you want, pick a spot on the
treadmill at which you will start timing when the mark you put on
the treadmill reaches it.
b. Start a stopwatch when the mark on the belt reaches that spot. I
usually start and stop the watch when the mark on the belt
disappears off the end of the treadmill, but this is difficult if you
are timing by yourself. Ideally, the timing procedure is done with
someone running on the treadmill, because the belt speed may be
slowed by someone on it. It is easiest to have someone other than
the runner do the timing.
c. Count each time the mark on the belt matches the timing spot,
starting your count with 0 when the watch is started. Count out
loud each time the spots match, and stop the stopwatch on the
count of 10. You should do the timing more than once to see if you
--- PAGE 160 ---
get the same count; repeat until you get within a few tenths of a
second on repeating timings.
d. Let’s say your watch says 13.03 seconds for those timed 10
revolutions. Assign the 10-revolution time the letter T and the
distance of the 10 revolutions (54.29 meters in our example) the
letter D. Speed in meters per minute is arrived at as follows: (D ×
60) / T = m/min. Example: (54.29 × 60) / 13.03 = 250 m/min (V,
belt velocity)
e. If you want a particular speed (V), you can calculate the T needed
for that V as follows: (D × 60) / V = T. Example: for 268 m/min,
54.29 × 60 / 268 = 12.15 seconds
In this example, a speed of 268 meters per minute (6:00 mile pace) is
achieved by adjusting the treadmill speed until you get the time of 12.15
seconds for 10 revolutions. It is useful to understand how relative various
mile paces and velocities in meters per minute are in terms of mph. It is also
nice to know what mph to set the treadmill belt. Table 7.2 shows
conversions among mph, mile pace, and m/min, and table 7.3 shows the
relationship among mph, mile time, and m/min. In addition, for those who
want to make more detailed comparisons of different speeds of movement,
see the appendix, Time and Pace Conversions.
Table 7.2    Conversions for Miles per Hour, Mile Pace, and
Meters per Minute
Miles per hour to mile pace
Formula Example: 9.0 mph
60 ÷ mph = mile pace 60 ÷ 9.0 = 6.6667 min/mile
Decimal minutes × 60 = seconds.6667 × 60 = 40 sec, so 6:40 mile
Mile pace to miles per hour
Formula Example: 6:40 mile pace
Seconds ÷ 60 = decimal minutes40 ÷ 60 = .6667 (plus 6 min = 6.6667 min)
60 ÷ minutes per mile = mph 60 ÷ 6.6667 = 9.0 mph
Meters per minute to miles per hour
Formula Example: 241.4 m/min
--- PAGE 161 ---
m/min × 60 = m/hr 241.4 × 60 = 14,484 m/hr
m/hr ÷ 1,609.344 m* = mph 14,484 ÷ 1,609.344 = 9.0 mph
Miles per hour to meters per minute
Formula Example: 9.0 mph
mph × 1,609.344* = m/hr 9.0 × 1,609.344 = 14,484 m/hr
m/hr ÷ 60 = m/min 14,484 ÷ 60 =241.4 m/min
Meters per minute to mile pace
Formula Example: 241.4 m/min
1,609.344* ÷ (m/min) = min/mile 1,609.344 ÷ 241.4 = 6.6667 min/mile
Decimal minutes × 60 = seconds.6667 × 60 = 40 sec, so 6:40 mile
Mile pace to meters per minute
Formula Example: 6:40 mile pace
Seconds ÷ 60 = decimal minutes40/60 = .6667 min
Minutes + decimal minutes = min/mile6 + .6667 = 6.6667 min/mile
1,609.344* ÷ (min/mile) = m/min 1,609.344 ÷ 6.6667 = 241.4 m/min
1,609.344 m is equal to 1 mile.
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
--- PAGE 162 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 163 ---
 
--- PAGE 164 ---
Chapter 8
Fitness Training
Running is something you can enjoy for your
entire life.
I often refer to the great physical education program at my high school, and
the most memorable part was the color system we followed, which assigned
white, red, blue, purple, and gold gym shorts based on fitness levels
achieved during tests administered in the fall and spring of each school
year. I have followed a similar route by writing up four training plans
distinguished by color for runners at different levels of training. These are a
white plan for beginner runners and for those who ran years before but have
not been running recently and want to give it another try, a red plan for
runners who are involved in some running but to a rather limited degree, a
blue plan for serious runners who want to increase their dedication to the
sport, and a gold plan for very serious runners who want to be involved in a
structured program and who have adequate time for serious participation.
Actually, the gold plan would be more than adequate for preparing for
serious racing and, in fact, so would the blue plan. A runner who’s spent
time on either the blue plan or gold plan could easily move to one of the
more structured event-training programs provided in the later chapters of
this book.
Before initiating a running program, beginners should first get a physical
exam to ensure their body’s readiness to handle the stress of the activity. In
that regard, please review the early chapters of this book where I explain
how the body responds and adapts to new stressors. Also, new runners
should consult qualified running coaches and knowledgeable, experienced
runners before investing too much on shoes and other apparel.
The less fit a person is when starting a running program, the more he or
she will benefit from a low-stress regimen. It is only after the runner attains
--- PAGE 165 ---
a high fitness level that workouts will need to be very demanding for
improvements to be made. So, especially at the start, you should stick to
your training program and try not to overdo it. Following are a few more
pieces of advice that pertain to all runners—beginners to the most highly fit
and experienced:
Rest—but not avoidance—is an essential part of your training.
Consistency with regard to rest, nutrition, and training is the key to
achieving maximum benefits from a program.
Never train when injured or ill.
WHITE STARTING PLAN
As you read through the white plan, you will notice that I have not indicated
you must run every day, but there is no problem with daily running, and
those who have adequate time may want to run more often. Again, people
who are not in very good shape when starting out in a running program do
not need to train very hard, or often, to gain considerable benefit.
If you have not been running at all, there is no doubt that running on 3 or
4 days of each week will produce positive results. I do suggest that when
running only 3 days each week, it might be better to spread those 3 days
over at least a 5-day period rather than doing 3 days of running in a row and
then having 4 days in a row of no running. However, if your situation
requires 3 consecutive days of running, followed by 4 days of no running,
that approach is certainly better than not running at all. I have bolded the
workouts in the workout tables that are recommended for minimum
participation.
The 16-week white plan begins by asking for 30 minutes of your time
each day of training and reaches a high of only 45 minutes in any of the
training days. Later in the white plan, I have you add strides (light, quick
runs of short duration, with full recovery between the individual strides)
throughout some training sessions. These strides help improve running
economy and prepare you for faster running as you progress in fitness.
Sometimes mixing strides with E running gives a nice break from just
steady running, and it may also allow you to arrive at different locations
--- PAGE 166 ---
during an E run where the footing is flat and soft, where strides become
more comfortable.
Some people who decide to take up the white plan may think the training
is not demanding enough, and for some who have been involved in other
types of exercise, it may not be. If you are one of these people, try the phase
I training for a couple of weeks, and if it is really of minimal stress for you,
jump ahead into one of the subsequent phases of the white plan. If phase IV
of the white plan is still of minimal discomfort, maybe you are capable of
handling the red plan, which gets into more advanced types of training.
Once you have completed the 16-week white plan, you may be
completely satisfied with how you feel and with your current level of
fitness, and if that is the case, I’d recommend just repeating the phase IV
training plan and seeing how comfortably you can perform at that level. Or
maybe you found one or two of the daily training sessions (in any of the
phases of the white plan) to be of particular interest; if so, you can just
repeat your favorite sessions whenever you go out for a run.
After completing the white plan you will probably be able to participate
in low-key road races, but make sure your first road race is not too long
(optimally no longer than about 40 minutes), and remember it is perfectly
fine to walk a little during a road race if the stress of running gets a little
harder than you are ready for. Make a point of starting any races a little
slower than you think is the pace you can handle for the full distance; it’s
always better, after you finish a race, to believe you could have gone a little
faster than to wish you had started a little slower.
Table 8.1 details the white plan. In the table, W stands for walk and E
stands for easy running. Strides (ST) are light, quick 15- to 20-second runs
(not sprinting); take 45 to 60 seconds of rest between strides.
Table 8.1    White Plan Phase I: Weeks 1-4
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 5 min W + 10 × 1 min E w/1 min W
recoveries + 5 min W
10 30
2 If you train today, repeat day 1 workout 10 30
3 5 min W + 7 × 2 min E w/1 min W 14 30
--- PAGE 167 ---
recoveries + 4 min W
4 If you train today, repeat day 3 workout 14 30
5 5 min W + 6 × 1 min E w/30 sec W + 8 × 30
sec E w/1 min W + 4 min W
10 30
6 If you train today, repeat day 5 workout 10 30
7 If you train today, repeat day 1 workout 10 30
White Plan Phase II: Weeks 5-8
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 3 min E + 3 min W + 10 × 2 min E w/1 min
W recoveries + 4 min W
23 40
2 If you train today, repeat day 1 workout 23 40
3 3 min E + 3 min W + 6 × 3 min E w/2 min W
recoveries + 4 min W
21 40
4 If you train today, repeat day 3 workout 21 40
5 3 min E + 3 min W + 20 × 1 min E w/30 sec
W recoveries + 4 min W
23 40
6 If you train today, repeat day 5 workout 23 40
7 If you train today, repeat day 1 workout 23 40
White Plan Phase III: Weeks 9-12
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 10 min E + 3 min W + 10 min E + 3 min W +
10 min E + 4 min W
30 40
2 If you train today, repeat day 1 workout 30 40
3 2 min W + 4 × 8 min E w/1 min W
recoveries + 2 min W
32 40
4 If you train today, repeat day 3 workout 32 40
5 5 min W + 20 min E + 5 min W + 10 min E +
5 min W
30 45
6 Day 5 session can be done on either day 5,
day 6, or both
0/30 0/45
7 If you train today, make it a 30 min W 0 30
White Plan Phase IV: Weeks 13-16
Day Workout Running minTotal min
--- PAGE 168 ---
1 30 min E + 6 ST + 6 min E ~38 ~44
2 If you train today, repeat day 1 workout ~38 ~44
3 10 min E + 5 ST + 10 min E + 5 ST + 10 min
E
~33 ~43
4 If you train today, repeat day 3 workout ~33 ~43
5 Repeat day 1 workout ~38 ~44
6 Day 5 session can be done on either day 5,
day 6, or both
0/~38 0/~44
7 If you train today, make it a 30 min W 0 30
RED INTERMEDIATE PLAN
The red plan is designed for runners who have completed the four phases of
the white plan or for those who have been running and believe they are able
to handle a little more stress than what the white plan offers. This red plan
should do a pretty good job of preparing a runner for recreational track or
road races, even if the distance to be covered in a race is an hour or a little
longer.
If you decide to start out with the red plan without first spending time in
the less demanding white plan, I suggest that you at least read through the
white plan to get a feel for what has been recommended in the program.
You might also want to look into the more demanding blue plan to see if
you are up to that level of training or at least to see what lies ahead for those
who complete the red plan and want to be challenged a little more.
After completing this red plan, you will be ready to handle short races,
but I recommend a little more training before jumping into a marathon. I
have dedicated an entire chapter to marathon training programs, and if that
is your primary reason for getting started with training, it would be a good
idea to read through chapter 16.
This red plan is designed for a minimum of 4 days of training each week,
and these 4 training days are bolded in table 8.2. If you decide to train more
than the indicated 4 days, there are suggestions for what to add on
additional days. Feel free to shuffle the training days around to take
advantage of days when you have more time or to avoid having to train
when weather conditions may be adverse.
--- PAGE 169 ---
When training just 4 days each week, try to avoid training 3 days in a
row when possible, and if training 5 days per week, generally try to separate
the 2 nontraining days, but 2 days off in a row is not necessarily a bad
approach.
Be familiar with how I describe the various workouts, which I do right
before the training plan. If you happen to participate in races during your
training, identify the VDOT values associated with race times, and use the
associated training paces (found in the VDOT tables in chapter 5) in your
training session of this red plan.
Once you complete the red plan, you should be familiar with how you
feel when running at E, T, and I paces and how you feel during an L run.
You may want to try a more challenging program (blue and gold plans are
next in order, if that is your desire), or you may want to try training for
specific distances as outlined in later chapters.
Also, you may decide to take a break from structured training and just
spend time going out for E runs of different durations. You may even take a
total break from running for a while. If you decide to take some weeks off
completely, it is best to start back again with a few weeks of just E running
before adding quality sessions to your training.
Table 8.2 provides a detailed structure of the red training plan. E
represents easy running, and L represents a long run that is easy and steady.
Strides (ST) are light, quick 15- to 20-second runs (not sprints) with 45 to
60 seconds of rest between each. Intervals (I) are hard runs at a pace you
could race at for 10 to 15 minutes. T represents threshold pace, which is a
comfortably hard pace you could handle for 40 minutes, and jogs (jg)
should be run at an easy pace. K refers to kilometer.
Table 8.2    Red Plan Phase I: Weeks 1-4
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 30 min E + 6 ST ~32 ~38
2 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~32 ~38
3 10 min E + 3 × 1 mile T w/1 min rests
between the T-pace miles + 10 min E
~40 ~45
4 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~32 ~38
--- PAGE 170 ---
5 10 min E + 6 × 1K T w/1 min rests between
the T-pace Ks + 10 min E
~50 ~55
6 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~32 ~38
7 E run of the lesser of 40 min and 6 miles~40 ~40
Red Plan Phase II: Weeks 5-8
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 30 min E + 6 ST ~32 ~38
2 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~32 ~38
3 10 min E + 2 mile T + 2 min rest + 1 mile T
+ 10 min E
~40 ~42
4 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~32 ~38
5 10 min E + 2 × 1 mile T w/1 min rests after
each + 2 × 1K T w/1 min rest + 10 min E
~42 ~45
6 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~32 ~38
7 40-50 min L run at steady E pace 40-50 40-50
Red Plan Phase III: Weeks 9-12
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 30 min E + 6 ST ~32 ~38
2 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~32 ~38
3 10 min E + 6 ST + 5 × 3 min hard w/2 min
jg recoveries after each + 10 min E
~47 ~50
4 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~32 ~38
5 10 min E + the lesser of 3 miles and 20
min steady at T pace + 10 min E
~40 ~40
6 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~32 ~38
7 40-50 min L run at steady E pace 40-50 40-50
Red Plan Phase IV: Weeks 13-16
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 30 min E + 8 ST ~33 ~41
2 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~33 ~41
3 10 min E + 4 ST + 2 × (5 min I + 4 min jg +
3 min I + 2 min jg) + 10 min E
~50 ~53
4 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~33 ~41
--- PAGE 171 ---
5 10 min E + 6 ST + 2 mile T + 2 min rest + 2
mile T + 10 min E
~50 ~55
6 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout ~33 ~41
7 40-50 min L run at steady E pace + 4 ST ~41-51 ~45-55
BLUE ADVANCED PLAN
The blue plan is for runners who have recently completed the red plan or
who have considerable running experience, including some races now and
then. Runners following this plan will be asked to train 5 to 7 days each
week, with the possibility of running more than once on some days if it is
necessary to accumulate desired weekly mileage goals. The recommended
quality days of training are bolded.
In this blue plan, weekly mileage ranges from about 40 to 52 miles (64
to 84 km) per week (or 4.5 to more than 7 hours per week, depending on the
speeds at which you are training). If you schedule races while following the
blue plan, rearrange the training schedule so you have at least 2 E days of
training before races. This may even mean deleting a day of training now
and then. Remember, races are a very important part of training, and they
play a significant role in improving your fitness.
If, while pursuing this blue plan, you believe the training is asking a little
too much of you, consider going back to the red plan or even taking a break
from running for a few weeks before getting back into a structured program.
If you choose to take a break for a while, read through chapter 9, which
outlines how to transition back into training from a period of little or no
activity.
After completing the blue plan, you will be familiar with different
intensities of training and how you feel during and after the various types.
Even though you will have considerable experience with a variety of
training amounts and intensities, you may not yet be prepared to tackle a
marathon. However, you will be fit enough to consider a marathon, so if
that is your goal, look into the marathon training programs presented later
in this book. I have also outlined training programs for many distance
events in the event you want to pursue training for a specific race distance.
--- PAGE 172 ---
If you find the blue plan stimulates you to train even harder, look into the
gold plan. Many runners who feel qualified for the gold plan may also want
to consider looking into a more specific program, designed for a particular
race distance, and there are plenty of those available in the chapters ahead.
Table 8.3 details the blue training program. E represents easy running,
and L represents a long run that is easy and steady. Strides (ST) are light,
quick 15- to 20-second runs (not sprints) with 45 to 60 seconds of rest
between each. R represents repetition running at a pace that you could race
at for 5 minutes. Hard runs are interval in nature and at a pace you could
race at for 10 to 15 minutes. T represents threshold pace, which is
comfortably hard, and jogs (jg) should be run at an easy pace. K refers to
kilometer.
Table 8.3    Blue Plan Phase I: Weeks 1-4
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 60 min E (can be 1 or 2 runs to total 60
min)
60 60
2 10 min E + 8 × 400 R pace w/400 recovery
jg + 10 min E
~50 ~50
3 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout 60 60
4 30-45 min E + 8 ST ~33-48 ~40-56
5 15 min E + 4 × 4 min hard w/3 min jg for
recovery + 15 min E
~60 ~60
6 If you run today, repeat day 4 workout ~33-48 ~40-56
7 60-90 min L run 60-90 60-90
Blue Plan Phase II: Weeks 5-8
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 60 min E run (can be 1 or 2 runs to total 60
min)
60 60
2 15 min E + 4 × (200 R + 200 jg + 200 R +
200 jg + 400 R + 400 jg) + 15 min E
~60 ~60
3 If you run today, repeat day 1 workout 60 60
4 30-45 min E + 8 ST ~33-48 ~40-56
5 15 min E + 20 min T + 4 ST + 15 min E ~55 ~55
--- PAGE 173 ---
6 If you run today, repeat day 4 workout ~33-48 ~40-56
7 60-90 min L run 60-90 60-90
Blue Plan Phase III: Weeks 9-12
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 60 min E 60 60
2 15 min E + 6 ST + 6 × (400 R + 400 jg + 200
R + 200 jg) + 15 min E
~65 ~65
3 If you run today, run 30 min E + 6 ST ~35 ~35
4 30-45 min E + 8 ST ~33-48 ~40-56
5 15 min E + 4 × 4 min hard w/3 min jg for
recovery + 15 min E
~60 ~60
6 If you run today, repeat day 4 workout ~33-48 ~40-56
7 60-90 min L run 60-90 60-90
Blue Plan Phase IV: Weeks 13-16
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 60 min E run 60 60
2 15 min E + 3 × 1K T w/1 min rests + 3 × 3
min H w/2 min jg + 15 min E
~60 ~65
3 If you run today, run 30 min E + 4 ST ~32 ~35
4 30-45 min E + 6 ST ~32-47 ~38-53
5 20 min E + 2 × 200 R w/200 jg + 3 × 1K T
w/1 min rest + 2 × 200 R w/200 jg + 5 min E
~50 ~55
6 If you run today, repeat day 4 workout ~32-47 ~38-53
7 60-90 min L run 60-90 60-90
GOLD ELITE PLAN
The gold plan is designed for runners who have completed phase IV of the
blue plan or who have considerable experience and time for training and
want to feel prepared for races over a variety of distances. Runners who
tackle this gold plan should be willing to accept 6 or 7 days of running each
week and even some days when they may run twice in the same day.
Weekly mileage will typically be more than 60 miles (97 km) per week, but
this can vary as weather and personal commitments dictate. Although you
--- PAGE 174 ---
could use this gold plan to train for a marathon, I recommend looking into
one of the specific marathon training programs provided in chapter 16.
Two-time Boston Marathon and 1985 Olympic marathon champion Joan Benoit Samuelson (bib 14)
has adjusted her training regimen to stay competitive through the years. She serves as an ambassador
for running, encouraging many women to take up the sport.
In the gold plan, six workouts are scheduled for each week (bolded in
the programs). Day 4 of each week is listed as an optional training day, but
feel free to make any day of the week a day off if conditions or personal
obligations so dictate. I also typically indicate Sunday as being day 1 of
each week, but you can make day 1 whatever day best suits your schedule.
In addition to the time allocated for each training session, you should
allow additional time for stretching, supplemental training, showering,
changing clothes, traveling to a training site, and so on. I don’t want to give
the impression that the time indicated for the various training sessions is all
you have to set aside for completing this program.
When following this program, give yourself 2 or 3 E days of training
before races and 1 E day after races for every 3,000 meters of race distance
(e.g., 3 E days after a 10K race; 5 E days after a 15K race). I also
recommend making your last quality training session before races a T
--- PAGE 175 ---
session that totals three 1-mile runs at T pace, with 2 minutes of rest
between the T-pace runs.
The gold plan (as detailed in table 8.4) should prepare you for racing
over almost any distance, but you still may want to look into more distance-
specific training programs in the later chapters of this book when you are
preparing for an important race.
Any runner who has completed the gold plan should be capable of
handling any type of workout or training program. If this program proves
too demanding, just move back to a less demanding plan, or select specific
parts of any of the training plans I have presented and work on those as time
permits. There are many ways to achieve your absolute ability, and what
works best for one person may not be best for another. What I try to do is
provide a variety of approaches and types of training sessions and hope
each person finds what feels and works best.
Table 8.4    Gold Plan Phase I: Weeks 1-4
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 75 min E run (can be done in 1 or 2 runs)75 75
2 20 min E + 10 × 400 R w/400 jg +10 min E ~60 ~60
3 60 min E (can be done in 1 or 2 runs) + 6
ST
~62 ~65
4 If you run today, repeat day 3 workout ~62 ~65
5 20 min E + 6 ST + 20 min T + 6 ST + 10 min
E
~54 ~66
6 60 min E run 60 60
7 120 min L run 120 120
Gold Plan Phase II: Weeks 5-8
Day Workout
Running
min
Total
min
1 75 min E run 75 75
2 20 min E + 5 × 3 min hard w/2 min recovery jg
+ 20 min E
~65 ~65
3 1 or 2 E runs of 30-40 min each + 6 ST ~32-82 ~38-88
4 If you run today, repeat day 3 workout ~32-82 ~38-88
--- PAGE 176 ---
5 20 min E + 6 ST + 8 × 200 R w/200 jg + 5 min E
+ 8 × 200 R w/200 jg + 5 min E
~55 ~55
6 60 min E run (can be done in 1 or 2 runs) 60 60
7 120 min L run 120 120
Gold Plan Phase III: Weeks 9-12
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 75 min E run (can be done in 1 or 2 runs)75 75
2 20 min E + 6 ST + 5 × 4 min hard w/3 min
jg + 20 min E
~80 ~80
3 75 min E run (can be done in 1 or 2 runs)75 75
4 If you run today, repeat day 3 workout 75 75
5 20 min E + 5 × 1 mile T w/1 min rests + 6
ST + 10 min E
~70 ~75
6 60 min E run (can be done in 1 or 2 runs)60 60
7 120 min L run 120 120
Gold Plan Phase IV: Weeks 13-16
Day Workout Running minTotal min
1 75 min E run (preferably the total of 2
runs)
75 75
2 20 min E + 3 × 3 min hard w/2 min jg + 8 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 10 min E
~60 ~60
3 75 min E run (can be done in 1 or 2 runs)75 75
4 If you run today, repeat day 3 workout 75 75
5 20 min E + 6 × 1K T w/1 min rests + 6 ST +
20 min E
~70 ~75
6 60 min E run (can be done in 1 or 2 runs)60 60
7 120 min L run 120 120
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 177 ---
 
--- PAGE 178 ---
Chapter 9
Training Breaks and
Supplemental Training
Make prudent decisions to benefit your body.
I have made a point of emphasizing that rest can be considered part of
training, rather than an avoidance of training, and I want to also say there
may be times when a full break from training can be beneficial. By a full
break I mean ceasing running completely for an extended period (from
several days to weeks or even a month or two).
Some breaks from training may be considerably longer than others. For
example, a major injury that requires surgery can easily mean being away
from running for an extended time and becoming frustrated with how
training is going can also lead to a relatively long break from running.
In a sense, there are two categories of breaks from training—planned
breaks and unplanned breaks. The main difference between these two types
of breaks is that during some of the unplanned ones, you may not be able to
do any running or even alternative exercises because of a particular injury
or illness. In planned breaks, running is always still a possibility, as are
other types of training.
Regardless of the reason for a break from regular training, it is not
advisable to jump right back into the volume of training you were doing
before the time off started. Training will have to be adjusted because there
has been some loss of fitness, and always remember that when your fitness
is down a little, training doesn’t have to be as hard as it was before the
break to still provide benefits. In other words, don’t try to work extra hard
to make up for lost time.
--- PAGE 179 ---
TAKING BREAKS
I don’t believe I have ever met a runner who hasn’t taken a break from
training at some time in his or her career. You can even think of a day or
two of rest from a hard training session as a break in training. Or what
about tapering for an event, during which training is substantially reduced.
Is that a break in training?
The greatest example of taking breaks when needed was a good friend of
mine who was an NCAA national champion, a Pan American Games
champion, and an Olympian. He also, by the way, broke 30 minutes in a
10K the year he turned 40. What is so interesting about this runner is that I
tested him at age 24, and his 
O2max was a high 78.6. I also tested him 25
years later, the year he turned 50, and his 
O2max at that age was 76.0. I
have never heard of someone that age with such outstanding aerobic power.
When I asked him how many days he thought he had taken off from
training during those 25 years between tests, he said he had kept track of
every day he took off, and they totaled more than 1,200 days. He basically
took a few days off every time he had a little injury or illness, and it clearly
didn’t hurt him any to take that many breaks in training over the years.
In addition, this great runner hardly ran during the winter months;
instead he did a lot of cross-country skiing, proving that supplemental
training did a great job of helping him maintain fitness for running (skiing
days were not considered days off from training, even though he was not
running during those days).
This documented case is a great example of what the human body can
maintain even with many little breaks. It certainly tells me that you are
better off taking a few rest days in order to heal an injury than to try to work
through that injury and just prolong the healing process (the same with
minor illnesses, which can cause a major setback if you try to train through
them).
Regardless of the reason for a break in training, it is always advisable to
consider what is happening to the body when it is away from daily activity.
Fitness will drop off, but usually not as much or as fast as expected, because
--- PAGE 180 ---
many of the physiological benefits that have been earned during regular
training are rather slow to go away.
For example, when the heart muscle, or running muscles for that matter,
have increased in strength over weeks of training, the loss in muscle is slow
to take place. Little changes in the muscle fibers and in the blood vessels
feeding those fibers are retained for a while as well.
Figure 9.1 shows a simplified example of how training benefits occur
over time and how those benefits are lost over time. In other words, when
just starting a program, relatively little training produces sizable benefits
that taper off over time; with a stop in training, the benefits are lost slowly
at first, so a few days off now and then won’t have much of a negative
effect, if any at all. After all, it is common to taper (back off, with more
rest) for an important race, with the idea that it will produce a better-than-
usual performance.
Figure 9.1    Reactions to training and taking a break from training.
A major consideration during breaks, especially for runners who have
been accumulating a high number of weekly miles, is that runners are used
to consuming a certain amount of calories per day and maintaining a
desired body weight. It is rather common to keep caloric intake the same
during a break, which can easily lead to putting on weight. For some, this
may be good, but at some point during a prolonged break there must be a
change in eating habits so that the body doesn’t gain excess fat tissue.
--- PAGE 181 ---
Staying healthy is rule number 1 when you are not exercising as much as
you normally do.
Nonplanned Breaks
A few things must be considered when faced with a nonplanned break in
training. Most important is to accept the fact that a break is necessary and to
do whatever needs to be done to fix the problem. Also, if returning to
serious training is important, supplemental training may minimize loss of
fitness during the break from running.
In fact, some types of cross-training will actually build up resistance to
further problems once back to regular running, with the result that running
will be better than before. For example, resistance training may improve
body balance and lead to a more economical running technique. Research
has shown that performing half-squats with relatively light weights can
improve running performance. In a sense, an unplanned break may end up
being a blessing in disguise, especially if it leads to finding new modes of
exercise that result in overall improvement in running performance.
When an injury is the culprit leading to a break, there are usually two
types—those that prevent continued use of the legs and those that allow
aerobic involvement of some of the running muscles in the legs. For
example, a broken leg will definitely prevent any activity involving impact
on that leg, and the only type of aerobic training that may be possible will
involve using the arms—swimming, for example. An ankle or foot injury
may prevent running but may allow deep-water running, which allows the
hip and many leg muscles to be trained fairly seriously.
Elliptical trainers and cycles may be an approach to exercise that doesn’t
involve impact, and even uphill walking on a treadmill may work for some
runners when they are not able to actually run. The important thing when
performing cross-training is to make sure that what you are doing is not
aggravating the problem further, thus prolonging the time off from true run
training. With any injury that lasts more than just a couple of days, it is a
good idea to consult with a physical therapist, athletic trainer, or medical
doctor. Something that seems very minor to you could be a major problem
--- PAGE 182 ---
down the road, and sometimes what seems major is a simple issue to deal
with, with proper advice.
Planned Breaks
Most runners will plan a year of training so that they get some time off, and
this is a good idea. First of all, I like to think of time off from training as
part of the training process. Just as the body reacts positively to easy days
of training between quality sessions, so can a bit of time away from training
allow the body, and mind, to reach a new level of performance once back to
a regular training schedule.
It is best to base your training break on what races you anticipate
running in coming months. In other words, have a long-range training plan
that includes desired breaks, fully understanding that an unplanned break
may alter that plan.
The length of a planned break depends on how stressful training has
been in the preceding weeks and months. If you have taken a few minor
injury or illness breaks throughout the year, then a planned break may not
even be needed, but don’t be pessimistic and assume there will be injury or
illness breaks in the months ahead, so there is no need to plan a break.
I tend to favor 2 weeks as the minimum time for a planned break, with
about 6 weeks being the maximum, provided you plan to continue with
serious running. Obviously, an unplanned break may be longer.
Table 9.1 is a guide for adjusting training intensity based on time away
from running training. This table allows adjustments in training speeds as
determined by VDOT values. Current VDOT dictates training speeds, and
as you race better, your training VDOT increases. On the other hand, as you
spend time away from training, current VDOT will also deteriorate to some
degree.
Table 9.1 shows how to adjust your VDOT value as dictated by time
away from training and whether or not you have engaged in leg-associated
aerobic training. If you haven’t been doing any leg-associated aerobic
training, you should use the values under the heading of FVDOT-1, but if
your time off has included this type of exercise, then use column FVDOT-2.
--- PAGE 183 ---
If you go down to the values associated with 6 weeks (42 days) off from
running, you see that, if not doing some leg training, your VDOT has
dropped by about 11 percent (.889 fraction of the starting value when in
good shape). With good cross-training, FVDOT-2 suggests that the loss in
VDOT is just about half of that 11 percent drop associated with not doing
anything during the time off (.944 fraction of the VDOT value when in
good shape).
Table 9.1    VDOT Adjustments for Training Breaks
Training break FVDOT-1 FVDOT-2
Up to 5 days 1.000 1.000
6 days .997 .998
7 days .994 .997
10 days .985 .992
14 days .973 .986
21 days .952 .976
28 days .931 .965
35 days .910 .955
42 days .889 .944
49 days .868 .934
56 days .847 .923
63 days .826 .913
70 days .805 .902
72 days or more .800 .900
As shown in table 9.1, there is no loss with only 5 days without training.
After about 10 weeks off from running, you probably have lost about as
much as you are going to lose, about 20 percent. However, to say that 20
percent is about all you can lose is misleading because if you gain a fair
amount of unnecessary weight, then the VDOT value can be negatively
affected further until you are back to ideal running weight. To calculate how
much change can be expected in your returning VDOT value, complete the
steps in figure 9.2.
--- PAGE 184 ---
FIGURE 9.2
Estimating Return VDOT Value
From J. Daniels, Daniels’ Running Formula, 4th ed. (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2022).
ADJUSTING MILEAGE OR DURATION
OF TRAINING
Table 9.2 provides a guide, and examples, for adjusting the amount of
training you should schedule after a prolonged break, planned or not. I have
indicated four categories of adjustments, and these are based on time
missed from running: 5 days or fewer (category 1), up to 4 weeks (category
2), between 4 and 8 weeks (category 3), and more than 8 weeks (category
4).
Table 9.2    Adjustments to Training Loads After a Break
Category Time off Adjustment to workload
% of prebreak
VDOT
--- PAGE 185 ---
1 Up to 5
days
5 days E @ no more than 100%
load
100%
2 6-28
days
1st half E @ 50% load 93.1-99.7% or
96.5-99.8% (see
table 9.1)
2nd half E @ 75% load 93.1-99.7% or
96.5-99.8% (see
table 9.1)
6 days 3 days E @ 50% load + 3 days E
@ 75% load
99.7-99.8%
28 days 14 days E @ 50% load + 14 days
E @ 75% load
93.1-96.5%
3 4-8
weeks
1st 3rd E @ 33% load 84.7-93.1% or
92.3-96.5% (see
table 9.1)
2nd 3rd E @ 50% load 84.7-93.1% or
92.3-96.5% (see
table 9.1)
Final 3rd E @ 75% load 84.7-93.1% or
92.3-96.5% (see
table 9.1)
29 days 9 days @ 33% load + 10 days @
50% load + 10 days @ 75% load +
some strides (ST)
93.0-96.4%
8 weeks 18 days E @ 33% load + 19 days
E @ 50% load +19 days E @ 75%
load + some ST
84.7-92.3%
4 8 weeks
or more
3 weeks E @ 33% load, but not
more than 30 miles/wk
80.0-84.7% or
90.0-92.3% (see
table 9.1)
3 weeks E @ 50% load, but not
more than 40 miles/wk
80.0-84.7% or
90.0-92.3% (see
table 9.1)
3 weeks E @ 70% load + ST, but
not more than 60 miles/wk
80.0-84.7% or
90.0-92.3% (see
table 9.1)
3 weeks E @ 85% load + ST & R,
but not more than 75 miles/wk
80.0-84.7% or
90.0-92.3% (see
table 9.1)
3 weeks E @ 100% load + ST & T
& R, but not more than 90
miles/wk
80.0-84.7% or
90.0-92.3% (see
table 9.1)
--- PAGE 186 ---
For runners who fit into category 2, for the first half of their return-to-
training time, they should not run a total weekly mileage that is more than
50 percent of what they were doing before missing training, and the second
half of their return time can total 75 percent of prebreak mileage. If these
runners did not engage in cross-training during time off, then the return
VDOT value would be 93.1 percent of prebreak VDOT, from column
FVDOT-1 in table 9.1.
Runners who missed 6 weeks of run training but who diligently
performed cross-training involving aerobic leg exercises would be placed in
category 3. Their cross-training drops their VDOT to 94.4 percent of the
presetback value (from table 9.1), and from table 9.2, the first third of their
return mileage should not be more than 33 percent of presetback mileage. If
they were previously totaling 60 miles per week, these first 2 weeks would
total not more than 20 miles each. Then the next 2 weeks could total 30
miles per week, and the final 2 weeks of return mileage could be 45 per
week. In addition, these runners could include regular strides during or after
some of their E runs.
After adjusting training loads and intensities for a return to training
following a setback, it should be OK to engage in whatever normal amount
of training was typical before the setback. Make adjustments to return
VDOT that may be a result of weight gain, as outlined earlier in this
chapter.
ADDING SUPPLEMENTAL TRAINING
When people decide to take up running, the first thing they usually consider
is how much time they can commit to running, both in terms of time per
day and days per week or per month. Certainly, it is important to schedule
time for running, but often little or no time is set aside for other activities
that may also lead to better running. These nonrunning activities include
such things as stretching, resistance training, massage, ice baths, and yoga.
Unfortunately, some of these things take time and some even cost money,
but if you do have the time and finances, they may be beneficial.
One type of supplemental training that has been shown to result in better
running performance is resistance training, and I encourage all runners to
--- PAGE 187 ---
include resistance training in their weekly program.
If you have access to a gym with weight machines, a few exercises that
can help your running include hamstring curls, knee extensions, hip
abduction and adduction exercises, and abdominal and back exercises. If
you have the time and inclination, arm exercises often make you feel better
in general, although they are usually of no real benefit in terms of helping
you run. If you decide to do resistance training with free weights,
concentrate first on proper technique, and add resistance gradually over
time.
Stretching and resistance training are important adjuncts to a running regimen to help prevent injuries
commonly incurred by runners.
Possibly the greatest benefit of leg strengthening is to build a resistance
to common running injuries. In other words, resistance training may not
improve your running as much as it builds resistance to injury, which allows
you to run more or faster without getting hurt. Then the harder running
training makes you a better runner.
In addition to helping ward off injuries, some resistance work can
actually improve running economy (lessen the energy demand of running).
The reasons are not clear, but it is assumed that being a little stronger gives
you a more solid base, more controlled stride, and less unnecessary
--- PAGE 188 ---
movement in running technique. Hill running, both uphill and downhill, can
also be useful in building strength and running economy.
A warning about downhill running is appropriate at this point because
running on too steep of a downhill course or on hard road surfaces can
increase your chance of hurting areas in your hips, knees, and feet. The key
to downhill running is to use a gradual hill, one of only 2 or 3 percent of
slope (for comparison, the steepest hill allowed on interstate highways is 6
percent, so make it a fair bit less than those steeper highway hills). When
running downhill, it is important to avoid overstriding; instead, concentrate
on a light, fast leg turnover. Make downhill running feel as if you are
“rolling” down the hill rather than bounding down, and it may help to land
rear-footed, rather than up on the balls of your feet.
On the other hand, uphill running can be on just about any steepness of
slope because you are not really pounding into the ground as hard as on a
flat surface, so you get the benefit of strengthening the pushing-off muscles
and the hip flexors, while reducing the landing shock associated with flat or
downhill running. If you do uphill running on a hill outside, take it very
easy running back down to the bottom. This brings up a great advantage of
doing uphill runs on a treadmill; you can run up for any period of time, and
when you need a break, you just hop off the treadmill and you don’t have to
run down to start the next uphill run.
Some people refer to supplemental training as cross-training. The term
used doesn’t really matter; the point is to stress some areas of your body
that may take a beating while running, especially high-mileage running. If
you take on runs that are longer than you have built up to at a gradual pace,
your good running mechanics may deteriorate, and nothing leads to running
injury more quickly than poor running mechanics. In fact, any time you feel
you are getting “sloppy” with your running technique, it is time to terminate
that run. Spend a little more time in the weight room or doing circuit
training or other activity, and you will see your running become more
enjoyable and you will feel yourself getting stronger during your regular
workout sessions.
Just as you need to carefully increase the amount and speed of your
running workouts, so do you need to carefully increase the stress of any
--- PAGE 189 ---
supplemental training you include in your overall program. My general rule
is that you give your body a good 4 weeks at one level of training stress
before increasing that stress—it’s better to undertrain than to overtrain. For
example, when considering run mileage, you are better to stay at a set
amount of weekly mileage for a good 4 weeks before increasing that
amount, but when you do increase, the increase can be a little more than
just adding 2 or 3 miles to your weekly total. Take the same approach to
resistance training: Stay at one level of stress for about 4 weeks before
moving to a greater stress.
In summary, consider adding supplemental training to your overall
program, even if it is just some exercises you can do in your house or
backyard. Getting stronger will increase your confidence, will improve your
running economy, and will help ward off those little injuries that often
plague runners at all levels of proficiency.
I have included a relatively simple circuit routine that does not require
equipment, so all the resistance is body weight. You will notice that stations
1 and 4 involve performing half of a 1-minute maximum. For example,
station 1, a push-up station, asks for you to perform half of your 1-minute
maximum, which means, before getting involved in the circuit, you first
need to establish how many push-ups you can do in 1 minute so you know
how many to do each time you arrive at station 1.
Push-Ups
The circuit starts with half of your 1-minute maximum of push-ups. Support
the body on hands and toes in a plank position. The arms should extend
straight down to the floor from the shoulders. Lower the body until the
chest nearly touches the floor. Using the arms, push the body back up to the
starting position.
Side Leg Lifts
At station 2, do 10 side leg lifts with each leg. Lie on one side with legs
straight. Support the body with one arm bent at the elbow with weight
resting on the forearm. Raise the top leg so that the foot is above shoulder
height. Return to the starting position.
High Knees
--- PAGE 190 ---
For station 3, do 30 high knee lifts with each leg while running in place
(figure 9.3). Start in a standing position and quickly bring one knee up.
Alternate right and left knees to maintain a continuous motion.
Figure 9.3    High knee.
Crunches
For station 4 do half of your 1-minute maximum of crunches. Lie on the
back with knees bent and feet on the floor. Place hands behind the head
(without holding the head), behind the ears, or across the chest. Steadily
raise the head and shoulders off of the floor to an upright position and
return to the starting position.
Recovery Run and Stretch
Station 5 is a 1-minute run or a 400-meter run. At station 6 do 2 minutes of
stretching of any kind.
Squat Thrusts
At station 7, do 10 squat thrusts (burpees). Start from a standing position
and drop into a squat with both hands touching the ground outside the feet
(figure 9.4a). Jump the legs back so that the body is in a push-up position
--- PAGE 191 ---
(figure 9.4b), and then jump back into the squatting position. Jump back to
a standing position to complete one repetition (figure 9.4c).
Leg Lifts
For station 8, complete 10 leg lifts with each leg, first resting on forearms
and facing upward with the hips off the ground. Bend one leg for balance
and lift the other leg to at least the height of the bent leg. Then, turn over
and rest on the forearms while facing downward. Keeping one leg straight,
raise the other leg up off of the ground as far as is comfortable. Complete
10 leg lifts with each leg.
Figure 9.4    Squat thrust.
Arm and Leg Flapping
At station 9, lie on the belly with arms over the head and legs straight out.
Alternately flap the arms and legs up and down until both arms and legs
have been raised and lowered 20 times.
Recovery Run
For station 10, run for 2 minutes or for 800 meters.
I recommend that people following this routine go through the entire
circuit three times, preferably two or three times each week. Stations 5 and
--- PAGE 192 ---
10 are runs of 1 minute and 2 minutes. These are recovery stations, so the
runs are not to be particularly fast. The goal is to allow you to recover from
resistance work before going to the next resistance station.
For those who use this circuit routine, it is a good idea to time yourself
every few weeks for the full three times through. You will be surprised how
much faster you will get through the entire 10 stations three times.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 193 ---
 
--- PAGE 194 ---
Part II
Applying the Formula to
Competitive Events
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 195 ---
 
--- PAGE 196 ---
Chapter 10
Season-Tailored Training
It may be beneficial to train differently this
season than you did last season.
Of all aspects of training for different running events, the most difficult to
find a common approach to is setting up a training season. So many factors
come into play that it is almost impossible to say there is a standard
approach that will work best for everyone. Take a typical high school cross
country season, for example. The coach will be working with new runners
(some of whom have never run a step before working with the school
coach), while others vary in previous training, from 20 or 30 miles (32 or
48 km) a week and a few races to some who are very experienced and
capable of placing in or winning a conference or state championship.
Probably one of the most challenging decisions for the coach is how to
fit everyone into the program. For runners who are training alone or without
a coach, it is important to approach a new season carefully and certainly not
too intensely. Remember, the less fit you are, the less intense the training
has to be to benefit. I offer suggestions that may minimize both the
frustration and the number of injuries that are always lurking around the
corner.
There is no one way of training that is best for every runner; we are not
all the same and need to be treated as individuals. That being said, there are
definitely some principles of training that apply to everyone, and I discuss
those in chapter 2. When I am setting up a season of training for any athlete
or team I am working with, I like to make things as simple as possible so I
don’t have to be at each runner’s side every time she goes out for a training
session.
Before setting up a season of training, runners and coaches must gather
essential information. Once all this information is acquired, it is easier to set
--- PAGE 197 ---
up a season plan that will work best for all runners involved. First
determine level of fitness based on current mileage and speeds of any
workouts that make up training sessions, which allows runners to establish
the proper VDOT value for all types of training.
Identifying the most important goal race of the current training season is
also important, as well as what races are available or desired along the way
to reaching that final goal race. Some runners like competing more often in
races that are shorter than the season’s goal race, and others prefer racing in
over-distance events. This season’s race information will influence the
training that is set up for each week of the season.
It is also useful to understand what facilities are available for training;
for example, is there an indoor track you can use in times of poor weather,
or is it possible to get on a treadmill to avoid really cold, windy, or hot days
outside? Some workouts are fun to do on a smooth grass course; is such a
facility available?
Maintaining a training program, even when conditions aren’t conducive to running outdoors, requires
flexibility and dedication.
One additional consideration when setting up a season program is how
much time is available for training and which days of the week provide the
--- PAGE 198 ---
most time. It can also be useful to consider what times of different days
work best for training, based on other commitments. During high school
years, daily schedules are fairly consistent, but in college, class schedules
can vary a great deal; for those who run after college, most runners have
jobs that dictate available time.
BREAK YOUR SEASON INTO PHASES
I like to break a season of training into four phases, as shown in figure 10.1.
Phase I is B/FIP, which stands for base training with foundation and
injury-prevention emphases.
Phase II has an IQ emphasis, which stands for initial quality
training phase.
Phase III is for TQ (transition quality) training, and this is generally
the most demanding of the four phases.
Phase IV is designed to provide the runner with peak performances
and is identified as FQ (final quality).
Training is designed so that phase I, at the left side of figure 10.1, is the
start of the season, which for students in high school and college may take
place during the summer before school begins for the year. Runners who are
not currently involved in studies and a school season of running have the
freedom to start phase I training whenever it best prepares them for the
most important races in the coming season. This means that phase IV is the
final stage of the current season and the time when races are most
important. The middle two phases advance fitness and racing ability from
the early part of the season to the most important part.
Figure 10.1    Dividing the season into four progressive phases of training.
--- PAGE 199 ---
At the bottom of each training phase, I have listed a number from 1 to 4;
these indicate the order in which I consider what type of training will go
into each phase. As can be seen, phase I training is the first to be
considered, as indicated by the number 1 at the bottom of that phase. It’s
necessary to first determine what each runner needs to do in the earliest part
of each season of training.
So, it is during phase I that each runner’s profile (the information
gathered before the start of the season) must most carefully be considered.
For example, how much running has each runner been doing each week?
What has been the longest training run performed in the past several weeks,
and have any races been run that may provide information as to current
state of fitness and what needs to be worked on before progressing into the
other phases of training? Refer back to figure 3.8 on page 48 for an example
of a runner profile that I ask each runner I coach to fill out.
I always make a point of asking each runner what type of workouts they
have been doing recently; in some cases, phase I is not even necessary
before going on to phase II. If a runner has been running regularly for 6 or
more weeks, it is OK to go into phase II. In fact, if the previous 3 or 4
weeks have included some relatively demanding workouts and the runner
has not experienced setbacks, it is fine to go into phase III.
You will notice in figure 10.1 that the number 2 is at the bottom of phase
IV. The reason is that I believe the next phase of training to be considered is
the final one—that period of time when you expect your best performance.
In other words, what specific training types and amounts of training do you
think will produce the best possible performances? Clearly, an 800 runner
and a 10K runner would be concentrating on different types of training
during that final (FQ) peak phase of preparation, so each athlete must be
considered separately.
Having determined what to include in phase IV, I step back to phase III,
with the goal of deciding what type of training will best prepare each runner
for the training that will take place in phase IV. For example, an 800 runner
will need more emphasis on speed work, and a 10K runner will need more
T workouts. Both these runners will need solid I training in phase III, but in
each phase there needs to be variation from the primary focus. After that, I
--- PAGE 200 ---
move back to phase II, with the same goal in mind—what should I be doing
in phase II that will best prepare the runner for what lies ahead in phase III,
the most demanding of the four phases of training?
A coach or a self-training runner must always consider what races may
be involved along the way in the earlier phases, and I always try to record
the dates and distances of all races that fall during the season so that daily
training can be arranged accordingly.
Phase I Training
My typical approach to setting up the four phases of training is to include
mostly E running during phase I. If there are more than 3 weeks available
for phase I, I would start adding light strides (10- to 15-second light, quick
runs, with full recoveries) to daily E runs, along with some supplemental
training, such as light resistance training and dynamic flexibility work, after
some of these runs. I also suggest one weekly easy L run that is 25 to 30
percent of each week’s total mileage.
Phase II Training
After phase I is completed, I prefer to include R training in phase II. I try to
add just one new stress to a new phase of training, and going from E
running to R workouts is adding only a speed stress, with little being asked
of the aerobic or lactate-clearance systems. If I were to go from E running
to I training, I would be adding two new stresses—faster running and more
stress on the aerobic system.
I like to add the light, fast running first so that when moving forward to
the I phase (phase III), the speed of the intervals is not a new stress because
the previous repetitions were actually faster. It is important to not use the
previous season’s best race times for identifying proper R training paces;
use a current race time or best estimate of what you think you could
currently race for 1 mile. A weekly L run should be continued throughout
phase II, and plan on two R sessions each week, with two E days of running
between the R sessions.
--- PAGE 201 ---
Phase III Training
The third phase (primarily I) adds an aerobic stress but not any faster
running speeds, which would be an additional new stress for the body to
deal with. Phase III training will vary a fair bit based on the events being
trained for. The shorter-distance specialists may get in just one good I
session each week and also continue with an R session, with the idea that
speed needs to be better maintained throughout. For longer-distance
runners, it is often better to get in two I sessions each week, but keep in
mind that if a 3,000-meter or longer race will be run in any of the phase III
weeks, that counts as a tough aerobic workout, and just one I training
session is adequate for that week. I also encourage the inclusion of an easy
L run each week during phase III.
Phase IV Training
I then typically move to some T running in phase IV. This is still quality
training but not as stressful as the previous I sessions were, and the runner
will be feeling better for the important races that are typical during phase
IV.
During phase IV, training will vary a fair amount based on the most
important events being prepared for. Longer-distance specialists usually do
best by concentrating on T workouts and discontinuing I sessions (unless a
race is the type that stresses the aerobic system to its maximum). With an L
run and a race each week, one T session per week is enough because races
at this time are usually fairly important. Even for the longer-distance
specialists, it is a good idea to include a few short R runs (four to six R
200s would be good) at the end of each T session. Shorter-distance
specialists may be better off combining a Q session with some T and R
work so they are sharp for shorter races that may take place in this phase of
training.
To summarize, I prefer going from E running to R workouts to I sessions
and finally to T training. However, when I move from E running to R
training, I continue doing E runs most days of the week during the R phase,
--- PAGE 202 ---
and when moving from R to I, I may still schedule occasional R sessions to
maintain what was gained in the earlier R phase.
It might be simplest to think of each phase as including a primary type of
training plus secondary training to maintain what was accomplished in the
previous phase. Definitely, when moving to phase IV, when the emphasis is
primarily on T workouts, I continue to add some R training, usually at the
end of a T session.
Remember as well that races are part of training, and the duration of a
race determines what training benefit is reaped. Races that last between
about 5 and 20 minutes are stressing the aerobic system to its fullest, so
these races are the ultimate benefit in terms of what I training does for you,
so it is easy to back off on the I training when you have regular races of
medium distance. This is why I tend to drop I training from a typical school
program during phase IV training, because the races accomplish what a
hard I session would normally do for you.
ADAPT THE PHASE LENGTHS AS
NECESSARY
I have set up the four phases of a training season to last 24 weeks—6 weeks
in each of the four phases. However, especially during high school and
college cross country seasons, there are not always 24 weeks available to
get in four 6-week phases of training. I have two ways to deal with this
shortage of time.
My first approach is to accomplish the first two phases during the
summer months, before the start of cross country season in the fall. In other
words, after the completion of a spring track season, start the summer with
phase I base training, which is then followed by phase II training, still
during the latter part of summer break. This means that as school starts in
the fall, the first 6 weeks of that academic year are set aside for phase III
training, the toughest part of the season, but this phase is completed before
the more important races held during the final 6 weeks of the season.
The other approach to dealing with lack of time for four solid training
phases in a season program is to set aside fewer than 6 weeks for each
--- PAGE 203 ---
phase. Figure 10.2 shows how I evaluate the season and where I prefer to
reduce time in various phases of training. I have placed 6 numbers in each
of the four phases of training to guide you.
If you look at numbers 1 through 12, you will see 1, 2, 3 in phase I;
followed by 4, 5, 6 in phase IV; 7, 8, 9 in phase II; and 10, 11, 12 in phase
III. What this indicates is that if you have only 3 weeks for an entire season,
all three of those weeks will be spent doing phase I–type training.
Figure 10.2    Numbering system to determine the number of weeks of training per phase according
to how many weeks you have available.
Adapted by permission of Runner’s World Magazine. Copyright 1993, Rodale Press Inc. All rights reserved.
For example, if you had a runner come out for the team with only 3
weeks left in the cross country season, and this runner had not been training
at all, and there was a place for him on your team, it seems logical to simply
ask this runner to do easy foundation training. No sense asking a runner in
this situation to get involved in more stressful quality training for just 3
weeks.
This approach should also be used with any runner who had to take a
break for some time because of an injury or illness. The worst thing to
subject one of these runners to would be a somewhat demanding workout
with the idea that you have to make up for lost time. Remember, the less
your body has been stressed recently in training, the more benefit it gets
from not imposing much stress on it. You are always better off a little below
optimum and healthy than unable to race because of overtraining or illness.
Now, if a runner had only 6 weeks for the entire season, figure 10.2
shows that I’d spend weeks 1, 2, and 3 doing foundation phase I training,
followed by 3 weeks of phase IV (weeks 4, 5, 6) training. With only 9
--- PAGE 204 ---
weeks available, I opt to not even get involved with any phase III training;
after 3 weeks in phase I, I’d go to phase II for 3 weeks, followed by the
final 3 weeks in phase IV.
You could also use figure 10.2 to work backward, relative to how many
weeks you had in a season. For example, if you had only 23 weeks
available, I’d drop a week in phase IV (number 24). If I had 20 weeks
available, I’d go 4 weeks in phase I (by dropping 21 and 23), followed by 6
weeks in phases II and III, and reduce phase IV to 4 weeks (by dropping 22
and 24). This approach is arrived at by dropping the weeks that would
probably have the least effect on ideal performance, based on how many
weeks are available.
SAMPLE WEEKLY PLAN
Presented in figure 10.3 is a sample week of training. I like to have L runs
on the first day of every week (considered to be Sunday). If in phase II of
training, then Q1, Q2, and Q3 (Q stands for quality days of training) may all
be R sessions, or Q1 and Q2 Rs and Q3 a T session. This latter arrangement
is an approach I apply for runners training for shorter or longer races;
because it is early in the season, R sessions are important and an occasional
T session would be useful. For a runner who has fewer than 4 weeks of
running in phase I, I would limit phase II to having only Q1 and Q2 Rs and
move Q2 to Thursday of that week.
When you’re not dealing with weekly races, I suggest Q1, Q2, and Q3
days on days 2, 4, and 7 of each week, or on days 3, 4, and 7 if you find the
back-to-back training system works well. Of course, the Q3 session could
also be a race, which is definitely a quality day of training.
Figure 10.3    Sample training week showing different approaches for including quality, E, and L
days.
--- PAGE 205 ---
Regardless of the phase of training, always make Q1 the most important
workout of the week, focusing on the type of training being emphasized at
that time of the season. I like to do this so that if poor weather or other
undesirable circumstances interfere with a week of training, you do get in
what is most important for that phase even if it means only one Q session
that week.
An example of a week in phase III might be an I session for Q1,
followed by T training (plus a few Rs) for Q2, and either another I session
or a race for Q3. In phase IV, for shorter-distance runners, Q1 and Q2 could
both be T plus R, and Q3 could be a race or a solid R session. For longer-
distance specialists, Q1 and Q2 are both T sessions and may be followed by
a few short Rs to finish off these sessions. If there is an important race on
the coming weekend, I suggest that there be just a Q1 session (T plus a few
Rs) for all runners, best performed 4 days before the race, and the race is
Q2 to finish that week.
SAMPLE SEASON PLAN
The following is a sample season plan for a runner training for fall cross
country.
Phase I: Sunday = L run; all other days of the week are E runs (+
strides on 3 days)
Phase II: Sunday = L run; Q1 = session of R 200s; Q2 =
combination of R 200s and R 400s; Q3 = session of R 400s; all
other days are E run days
Phase III: Sunday = L run; Q1 = I session of repeated 1,000-meter
runs; Q2 = steady 20-minute run at T pace + 4 × R 200s; Q3 = race
or session of I 1,200s
Phase IV: Sunday = L run; Q1 = T plus some R 200s; Q2 = T; Q3 =
race or combination of T, I, and R; if a race that week is important,
then Q2 = the race and there is no Q3
Try to design each season’s plan well ahead of the season start, and
always feel free to make adjustments over time based on race dates, weather
--- PAGE 206 ---
changes, runner schedules, and possible setbacks. Training speeds may also
be adjusted to meet each runner’s current state of fitness. The overall plan is
designed to introduce one new stress when moving from one phase of
training to the next, and new phases will also provide for maintenance of
benefits earned in each previous phase.
An additional consideration when setting up a season of training is
individual strengths and weaknesses, in keeping with the idea that we are
not all the same. Some runners do better working more on speed, and others
seem to benefit more from endurance work. I have developed what I call a
speed versus endurance table, which is shown in table 10.1. This table has
three columns of times for a few different distances. The left-hand column
lists 400-meter times, the middle column has 800-meter times, and the right
column lists both 1,500 and mile times. If you circle your best times in each
of the three columns and then draw a line connecting the times you have
circled, you will have a line that slopes down to the right, slopes up to the
right, or goes straight across the page.
If your line goes straight across, I would consider you equal in speed and
endurance. If your line slopes down to the right, which is typical for most
young runners, this suggests that your speed is better than your endurance.
Of course, sloping up to the right indicates better endurance than speed. If
your line goes down from the 400 to the 800 and back up to the 1,500, this
means you have better speed and better endurance than your 800 suggests,
and you should be able to race a better 800 than you have so far.
Other lines that go up and down, rather than straight in a linear fashion,
usually mean an event that is lower than the others has not been raced as
often or is of less interest; when one event is higher than the others, your
body is better designed (possibly by muscle fiber type) for that distance
than for the others, or this event has been raced most often or with greater
enthusiasm.
Let’s take an example of a runner with a best 400 time of 60 seconds, a
best 800 of 2:20.8, and a best 1,500 of 5:06. This suggests that speed is
better than endurance, and the logical approach to training may be to work
more on endurance. After a season of endurance training, if the slope of
your curve doesn’t flatten out a little more, you may be the type of runner
--- PAGE 207 ---
who will usually remain better at speed than endurance, and the next
approach to training may be to work more on the speed factor.
Working on speed for a runner like this may improve both speed and
endurance, seen if the slope of the line connecting best times remains at
about the same angle of slope. So try working on the weakness first, but if
that doesn’t bring positive results, concentrate on your strength, and that
may well improve both strength and weakness. If nothing else, referring to
this table at the end of each season will show how your speed and
endurance are adjusting to the training you are carrying out.
Table 10.1    Speed Versus Endurance Finder
400 m time 800 m time 1,500 m time/mile time
46.0 1:41.2 3:27.6/3:44.1
47.0 1:43.4 3:32.0/3:48.9
48.0 1:45.6 3:36.5/3:53.8
49.0 1:47.8 3:41.0/3:58.6
50.0 1:50.0 3:45.5/4:03.5
51.0 1:52.2 3:50.0/4:08.3
52.0 1:54.4 3:54.5/4:13.2
53.0 1:56.6 3:59.0/4:18.0
54.0 1:58.8 4:03.5/4:22.9
55.0 2:01.0 4:08.0/4:27.7
56.0 2:03.2 4:12.5/4:32.6
57.0 2:05.4 4:17.0/4:37.5
58.0 2:07.6 4:21.5/4:42.4
59.0 2:09.8 4:26.0/4:47.3
60.0 2:12.0 4:30.5/4:52.2
61.0 2:14.2 4:35.0/4:57.1
62.0 2:16.4 4:39.5/5:02.0
63.0 2:18.6 4:44.0/5:06.8
64.0 2:20.8 4:48.5/5:11.7
65.0 2:23.0 4:53.0/5:16.6
66.0 2:25.2 4:57.5/5:21.5
67.0 2:27.4 5:02.0/5:26.3
68.0 2:29.6 5:06.5/5:31.2
69.0 2:31.8 5:11.0/5:36.0
--- PAGE 208 ---
70.0 2:34.0 5:15.5/5:40.9
71.0 2:36.2 5:20.0/5:45.7
72.0 2:38.4 5:24.5/5:50.6
73.0 2:40.6 5:29.0/5:55.5
74.0 2:42.8 5:33.5/6:00.4
75.0 2:45.0 5:38.0/6:05.2
76.0 2:47.2 5:42.5/6:10.1
77.0 2:49.4 5:47.0/6:14.9
78.0 2:51.6 5:51.5/6:19.8
79.0 2:53.8 5:56.0/6:24.7
80.0 2:56.0 6:00.5/6:29.6
81.0 2:58.2 6:05.0/6:34.4
82.0 3:00.4 6:09.5/6:39.3
83.0 3:02.6 6:14.0/6:44.2
84.0 3:04.8 6:18.5/6:49.1
85.0 3:07.0 6:23.0/6:53.9
86.0 3:09.2 6:27.5/6:58.8
87.0 3:11.4 6:32.0/7:03.6
88.0 3:13.6 6:36.5/7:08.5
89.0 3:15.8 6:41.0/7:13.4
90.0 3:18.0 6:45.5/7:18.3
91.0 3:20.2 6:50.0/7:23.1
92.0 3:22.4 6:54.5/7:28.0
93.0 3:24.6 6:59.0/7:32.8
94.0 3:26.8 7:03.5/7:37.7
95.0 3:29.0 7:08.0/7:42.5
96.0 3:31.2 7:12.5/7:47.4
97.0 3:33.4 7:17.0/7:52.3
98.0 3:35.6 7:21.5/7:57.2
99.0 3:37.8 7:26.0/8:02.0
1:40 3:40.0 7:30.5/8:06.9
1:41 3:42.2 7:35.0/8:11.8
1:42 3:44.4 7:39.5/8:16.6
1:43 3:46.6 7:44.0/8:21.5
1:44 3:48.8 7:48.5/8:26.4
1:45 3:51.0 7:53.0/8:31.3
1:46 3:53.2 7:57.5/8:36.1
--- PAGE 209 ---
1:47 3:55.4 8:02.0/8:41.0
1:48 3:57.6 8:06.5/8:45.9
1:49 3:59.8 8:11.0/8:50.8
1:50 4:02.0 8:15.5/8:55.7
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 210 ---
 
--- PAGE 211 ---
Chapter 11
800 Meters
Good running results from knowing why you do
what you do.
Often with the 800, and to a lesser extent in longer events, runners take
either a speed or an endurance approach to the race. In other words, some
great 800 runners are primarily 400 specialists, and others rely more on
endurance and less on all-out speed. That being said, the 800 is a very
special track event, maybe one of the more difficult events to train for and
certainly one of the most demanding. You might say that 800 runners are
high-speed endurance athletes.
The 800 requires both great aerobic and anaerobic power, and it is not
always easy to determine the better approach for each individual runner. I
have been lucky enough to watch some great 800 runners over the years,
including Peter Snell when he won at the Rome Olympics in 1960, Alberto
Juantorena when he won the Montreal Olympics in 1976, and Joaquim Cruz
leading all but about one lap of the 800s he ran in the Los Angeles
Olympics in 1984. I also watched Jim Ryun break the 880-yard world
record.
Snell and Ryun were more endurance oriented, Juantorena was definitely
a great 400 runner, and Cruz was fairly well trained for both speed and
endurance. I have designed training programs that are flexible enough that
parts of the training can be adjusted to cater to all 800 specialists, regardless
of their preferred approach.
The better 800 runners include a fair amount of resistance training in
their overall programs. Cruz was involved in circuit training, and coach Bob
Timmons had Ryun doing a good amount of weight training, even in his
early training years.
--- PAGE 212 ---
In recent years it has become more popular to increase endurance
training for 800 runners because it was shown that the aerobic contribution
of an 800 race is greater than once thought. As with all of my training
programs, I present a four-phase 24-week program, but the four phases may
be cut down in order to fit into a shorter time frame.
PHASE I
As explained in chapter 10, I prefer to break the season into four phases of
training, and phase I is for the purpose of building a base and a resistance to
injury. Resistance training, generally three times per week, should be
included in phase I. Some coaches and runners prefer using free weights,
while others like circuit training or body-resistance workouts (e.g., sit-ups,
push-ups, bar dips, squat thrusts). The important thing about any resistance
training is to learn technique first, with minimal resistance; heavier
resistance should not be used until technique is of high quality.
--- PAGE 213 ---
Jarmila Kratochvílová used her farm-girl strength and twice-daily interval training (which reflected
her belief that endurance building did not diminish speed) to dominate her competition and set a new
800-meter world record at the age of 32.
The weeks available for phase I training may vary a great deal, with
some high school runners having only a few weeks for this phase and other
runners able to spend more than 2 months on phase I training. What’s
important is having an overall plan for the entire season and making sure
that each new phase of training benefits from each previous phase.
--- PAGE 214 ---
PHASE II
Each week of phase II includes three Q (quality) sessions of training,
although I do not specify which days of the week to set aside for each Q
session. Generally, you may want to do Q1 and Q2 on Monday and Tuesday
of each week and plan Q3 for Friday. Naturally if you are in a competitive
season and have a race or two on most Fridays or Saturdays, you will not
want to schedule a Q session for Friday, but remember that a race is a Q
session, so eliminating a Friday Q session for a race does not minimize the
Q sessions you have in a week.
Some coaches and runners prefer having Q sessions on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday or Saturday, or even Tuesday, Wednesday, and
Saturday. It is worth trying different approaches for spreading out the Q
sessions. I like to add a fairly long run on weekends, whether after a meet
on Saturday (as a prolonged cool-down after a race or two) or done
separately on Sunday. The most important thing is to arrange Q sessions so
they fall when the runners are not feeling fatigued from a previous Q
session or race. Remember, it is fine for a runner to skip a Q session now
and then if not feeling up to a quality session—rest is part of training.
Phase II is not the most stressful part of a season, so always try to
imagine you could do more in each workout than is actually scheduled for
that session. It is much better to think you could have done more after each
Q session than to wish it hadn’t been so hard. Refer to chapter 4 for a
review of the various types of training, and always try to have a reason for
moving from one intensity of effort to a harder one (usually this is
accomplished by racing faster than what earlier training was based on—see
the VDOT tables in chapter 5).
PHASE III
Phase III introduces the hardest training. In this phase, I recommend a long
run on each Saturday (if no race that day) or Sunday if there was a Saturday
race the day before. As mentioned in my description of phase II, it is also
possible to have a prolonged easy cool-down run after a Saturday track
meet, and that can be used as your long run for the week.
--- PAGE 215 ---
For most runners, phase III comes during the middle of a competitive
season, and with this being the time of hardest workouts, I recommend
three Q sessions per week, with weekend L runs counting as Q sessions.
With Saturday meets, the two midweek Q sessions may be Monday and
Wednesday or Tuesday and Wednesday, leaving Thursday and Friday as E
days before the Saturday meet. With a Friday meet, consider Monday and
Tuesday for the two midweek Q sessions that week.
Use appropriate VDOT values to identify proper training paces for your
workouts, but don’t increase the speed of training any more often than
every 3rd or 4th week, even if a race says it is time to go faster. Let your
body have several weeks performing at one level of stress before going to
the next level.
PHASE IV
Most weeks of this phase of training will have three Q sessions and often an
additional Q day in weeks when you have a race. However, when a race in
any week of phase IV is very important, such as a championship race or one
that qualifies you for a championship, I suggest having just one Q session
early in that week. This Q session should be of limited duration and not any
faster than is usual for your recent training sessions.
All non-Q days are E days, and on the E days you can run once, twice,
or not at all, depending on desired weekly mileage. Learn to arrange your Q
days and E days so you feel fresh for important races.
Try to arrange L runs so they come right after meets you race in, either
immediately following a meet or early the next day. In race weeks, I like to
schedule the final Q session 3 or even 4 days before the race, and that
session should be T-pace effort with maybe light repetitions of 200 meters
each. During a season, it is always beneficial to try different approaches for
the days leading up to races so you know what works best for you, and that
may not be what works best for another runner on your team.
TRAINING ON 20 TO 30 MILES (32 TO
--- PAGE 216 ---
48 KM) PER WEEK
Phase I.    Phase I involves three Q sessions per week, with L runs
counting as a Q session. I do not specify which days to schedule the Q
sessions because circumstances and weather may affect the days. Feel free
to fit in the three Q sessions where appropriate for you.
All non-Q days are for E running, and an E day can be little or no
running if a day off is desired now and then. Use the E days to accumulate
desired weekly mileage totals. When there is a weekly race, schedule 2 E
days before races and 3 E days before championship or equally important
races.
Use a recent race time to determine your current VDOT value for setting
training paces (see chapter 5 for VDOT details). If no recent races are
available, make a conservative estimate of current race time for 1 mile, and
consider that to be your R pace. Make I pace 8 seconds per 400 slower than
R, and make T pace 8 seconds per 400 slower than I.
Strides (ST) are light, quick 15- to 20-second runs (not sprints) with 45
to 60 seconds of recovery between. Feel free to perform strides on a gradual
uphill course; be careful coming back down between uphill strides. M pace
is about 20 to 30 seconds per mile faster than typical E (L) pace.
Phase II.    During phase II, make Q1 each week a 40- to 60-minute L run
(but not more than 30 percent of the week’s total mileage) plus six ST, and
add six to eight ST (which can be gradual uphill runs if desirable) to the
middle or end of two of your weekly E runs. Jg is jogging or easy running.
Phase III.    During phase III, make R pace 1 second per 200 (2 seconds
per 400 and 3 seconds per 600) faster than during the last 3 weeks of phase
II training. Set I pace based on recent race and associated VDOT values, or
make I pace 8 seconds per 400 slower than the new R pace. FR (fast
repetitions) are to be 3 seconds per 200, 6 seconds per 400, and 12 seconds
per 600 faster than current R pace. T pace is to be 16 seconds per 400
slower than the new R pace (8 seconds per 400 slower than I pace). Include
eight ST (flat or uphill) during two of your weekly E runs. Hard (H) is I-
--- PAGE 217 ---
pace effort. Moderately long (Mod) pace is about 20 to 30 seconds per
mile faster than typical E (L) pace.
In any weeks ending in races, eliminate Q3 of the training plan and
consider races as replacing Q3 for that week. On low-stress race days (and
with adequate time), consider adding 6 × 200 R w/200 jg after you’re
finished racing for the day.
Phase IV.    During phase IV, make R pace 1 second per 200 (2 seconds
per 400 and 3 seconds per 600) faster than during the last 3 weeks of phase
III training. The information for phase III applies for phase IV as well.
Table 11.1 summarizes a 24-week training program for 800-meter runners
whose weekly training totals 20 to 30 miles (32 to 48 km) per week. For
numbers with no associated distances, assume miles (example: 2 T means 2
miles at threshold running).
Table 11.1    800-Meter Training Plan for 20 to 30 Miles (32 to 48
km) per Week
Phase I
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
1 40-45 min L run 20 min E + 8 ST + 10
min E
20 min E + 8 ST + 10 min
E
2 40-45 min L 30 min E + 8 ST + 10
min E
10 min E + 8 ST + 20 min
E
3 45 min L 10 min E + 8 ST + 20
min E
30 min E + 8 ST + 10 min
E
4 40 min M run 40 min E + 8 ST + 5
min E
10 min E + 10 ST + 20 min
E
5 45 min L + 6 ST 20 min E + 20 min M +
6 ST
20 min E + 10 ST + 10 min
E
6 40 min M + 6 ST 40 min E + 8 ST + 5
min E
10 min E + 10 ST + 20 min
E
Phase II
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
7 40-60 min L + 6
ST
20 min E + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
10 min E + 8 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
8 40-60 min L + 6
ST
20 min E + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 × 400 R
20 min E + 8-10 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
--- PAGE 218 ---
w/400 jg + 10 min E
9 40-60 min L + 6
ST
10 min E + 4 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 10 min E
10 min E + 4-6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E + 4-6
× 200 R w/200 jg + 5 min E
10 40-60 min L + 6
ST
10 min E + 3 sets of
(200 R + 200 jg + 200
R + 400 jg + 400 R +
200 jg) + 10 min E
10 min E + 4-6 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 10 min E
11 40-60 min L + 6
ST
20 min E + 2 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
10 min E + 4 ST + 600 R +
600 jg + 2 × 400 R w/400 jg
+ 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 10
min E
12 40-60 min L + 6
ST
10 min E + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 1 × 600 R +
15 min E
10 min E + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 4 × 300 R w/300
jg + 20 min E
Phase III
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
13 60 min L run + 6
ST
15 min E + 5 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 4 × 200
FR w/200 jg + 15 min
E
10 min E + 3 sets of (600 R
+ 30 sec rest + 200 FR + 7
min E) + 20 min E
14 20 min E + 3 × 1
T w/2 min rests
+ 20 min E
15 min E + 4 × 800 I
w/3 min jg + 6 ST + 15
min E
10 min E + 600 R + 600 jg
+ 500 R + 500 jg + 400 FR
+ 400 jg + 2 × 300 FR
w/300 jg + 10 min E
15 60 min L run + 6
ST
15 min E + 8 × 2 min H
w/1 min jg + 1 E + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 15
min E
20 min E + 3 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 4 × 300 FR
w/300 jg + 10 min E
16 15 min E +
steady 3 T + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg
+ 10 min E
15 min E + 4 × 1K I
w/3 min jg + 6 ST + 20
min E
20 min E + 2 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 2 × 600 R w/600
jg + 2 × 300 FR w/300 jg +
15 min E
17 60 min L run + 8
ST
20 min E + 4 × 4 min H
w/3 min jg + 10 min E
10 min E + 4 × 400 FR
w/400 jg + 10 min E + 4 ×
400 R w/400 jg + 10 min E
18 10 min E + 40
min Mod + 6 ST
15 min E + 4 × 1,200 I
w/3 min jg + 6 ST + 10
min E
10 min E + 3 sets of (600 R
+ 30 sec rest + 200 FR + 7
min E) + 20 min E
Phase IV
--- PAGE 219 ---
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
19 45-60 min L run
+ 8 ST
10 min E + 4 ST +
steady 20 min T + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 10
min E
20 min E + 600 FR + 1K jg
+ 600 FR + 1K jg + 600 FR
+ 15 min E
20 50-60 min L run
+ 6 ST
10 min E + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 × 1 T w/2
min rest + 6 ST + 10
min E
20 min E + 600 FR + 1K jg
+ 2 × 400 FR w/400 jg + 4
× 200 R w/200 jg + 10 min
E
21 20 min E +
steady 3 T + 8
ST + 20 min E
20 min E + 3 × 1 T w/2
min rests + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg
20 min E + 600 FR + 600 jg
+ 2 × 300 FR w/500 jg + 3
× 200 R w/200 jg + 10 min
E
22 60 min L run + 8
ST
20 min E + 5 × 1K T
w/1 min rests + 6 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 10
min E
20 min E + 8 × 200 FR
w/200 jg + 20 min E
23 60 min L run + 6
ST
10 min E + 3 × 1 T w/2
min rests + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 20 min E
20 min E + 2 × 200 FR
w/400 jg + 2 × 600 FR
w/1K jg + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 10 min E
24 50 min L run + 6
ST
10 min E + 2 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 × 1 T w/2
min rest + 2 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
20 min E + ST + important
race day
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
TRAINING ON 40 MILES (64 KM) PER
WEEK
Phase I.    Phase I involves three Q sessions per week, with L runs
counting as a Q session. I do not specify which days to schedule the Q
sessions because circumstances and weather may affect the days. Feel free
to fit in the three Q sessions where appropriate for you.
All non-Q days are for E running, and an E day can be little or no
running if a day off is desired now and then. Use the E days to accumulate
desired weekly mileage totals. When there is a weekly race, schedule 2 E
days before races and 3 E days before championship or equally important
races.
--- PAGE 220 ---
Use a recent race time to determine your current VDOT value for setting
training paces (see chapter 5 for VDOT details). If no recent races are
available, make a conservative estimate of current race time for 1 mile, and
consider that to be your R pace. Make I pace 8 seconds per 400 slower than
R, and make T pace 8 seconds per 400 slower than I.
Strides (ST) are light, quick 15- to 20-second runs (not sprints) with 45
to 60 seconds of recovery between. Feel free to perform strides on a gradual
uphill course; be careful coming back down between uphill strides.
Moderately long (Mod) pace is about 20 to 30 seconds per mile faster than
typical E (L) pace.
Phase II.    During phase II, make Q1 each week a 60-minute L run (but
not more than 25 percent of the week’s total mileage) plus six ST, and add
six to eight ST (which can be gradual uphill runs if desirable) to the middle
or end of two of your weekly E runs.
Phase III.    During phase III, make R pace 1 second per 200 (2 seconds
per 400 and 3 seconds per 600) faster than during the last 3 weeks of phase
II training. Set I pace based on recent race and associated VDOT values, or
make I pace 8 seconds per 400 slower than the new R pace. FR (fast
repetitions) are to be 3 seconds per 200, 6 seconds per 400, and 12 seconds
per 600 faster than current R pace. T pace is to be 16 seconds per 400
slower than the new R pace (8 seconds per 400 slower than I pace).
Include eight ST (flat or uphill) during two of your weekly E runs. Mod
(moderately long) pace is about 20 to 30 seconds per mile faster than
typical E (L) pace. Hard (H) is I-pace effort. In weeks ending in races,
eliminate Q3 of the training plan and consider races as replacing Q3 for that
week. On low-stress race days (and with adequate time), consider adding 6
× 200 R w/200 jg after you’re finished racing for the day.
Phase IV.    During phase IV, make R pace 1 second per 200 (2 seconds
per 400 and 3 seconds per 600) faster than during the last 3 weeks of phase
III training. The information for phase III applies for phase IV as well.
Table 11.2 summarizes a 24-week training program for 800-meter runners
whose weekly training totals about 40 miles (64 km) per week. For numbers
--- PAGE 221 ---
with no associated distances, assume miles (example: 2 T means 2 miles at
threshold running).
Table 11.2    800-Meter Training Plan for 40 Miles (64 km) per
Week
Phase I
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
1 60 min L run 30 min E + 8 ST + 20
min E
20 min E + 8 ST + 10 min
E
2 60 min L run 40 min E + 8 ST + 10
min E
10 min E + 8 ST + 20 min
E
3 60 min L run 30 min E + 8 ST + 20
min E
30 min E + 8 ST + 10 min
E
4 50 min Mod run 40 min E + 8 ST + 10
min E
10 min E + 10 ST + 20
min E
5 70 min L + 6
ST
30 min E + 20 min Mod
+ 6 ST
20 min E + 10 ST + 10
min E
6 50 min Mod + 6
ST
40 min E + 8 ST + 5 min
E
10 min E + 10 ST + 20
min E
Phase II
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
7 60 min L + 6
ST
20 min E + 8 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 20 min E
20 min E + 8 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
8 60 min L + 6
ST
20 min E + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 4 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 10 min E
20 min E + 10 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 20 min E
9 60 min L + 6
ST
20 min E + 6 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 20 min E
20 min E + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E + 6 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 10 min
E
10 60 min L + 6
ST
15 min E + 4 sets of
(200 R + 200 jg + 200 R
+ 400 jg + 400 R + 200
jg) + 10 min E
15 min E + 6 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 15 min E
11 60 min L + 6
ST
20 min E + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
15 min E + 4 ST + 600 R
+ 600 jg + 3 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
--- PAGE 222 ---
12 60 min L + 6
ST
15 min E + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 4 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 1 × 600 R +
20 min E
15 min E + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 6 × 300 R
w/300 jg + 20 min E
Phase III
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
13 60 min L run +
8 ST
20 min E + 6 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 6 × 200 FR
w/200 jg + 15 min E
20 min E + 3 sets of (600
R + 30 sec rest + 200 FR
+ 7 min E) + 20 min E
14 15 min E + 4 ×
1 T w/2 min
rests + 15 min
E
15 min E + 6 × 800 I w/3
min jg + 6 ST + 15 min E
15 min E + 600 R + 600 jg
+ 500 R + 500 jg + 400
FR + 400 jg + 3 × 300 FR
w/300 jg + 10 min E
15 60 min L run +
6 ST
15 min E + 8 × 2 min H
w/1 min jg + 1 mile E + 4
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 ×
200 FR w/200 jg + 15
min E
20 min E + 4 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 4 × 300 FR
w/300 jg + 10 min E
16 15 min E +
steady 3 T + 6
× 200 R w/200
jg + 10 min E
15 min E + 5 × 1K I w/3
min jg + 6 ST + 20 min E
20 min E + 2 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 3 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 2 × 300 FR
w/300 jg + 15 min E
17 60 min L run +
8 ST
20 min E + 4 × 4 min H
w/3 min jg + 10 min E
20 min E + 4 × 400 FR
w/400 jg + 10 min E + 4 ×
400 R w/400 jg + 10 min
E
18 10 min E + 40
min Mod + 6
ST
15 min E + 5 × 1,200 I
w/3 min jg + 6 ST + 10
min E
10 min E + 3 sets of (600
R + 30 sec rest + 200 FR
+ 7 min E) + 20 min E
Phase IV
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
19 60 min L run +
8 ST
15 min E + 4 ST +
steady 20 min T + 6 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 10 min
E
20 min E + 600 FR + 1K
jg + 600 FR + 1K jg + 600
FR + 20 min E
20 60 min L run +
6 ST
15 min E + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 × 1 T w/2
min rest + 6 ST + 10 min
E
20 min E + 600 FR + 1K
jg + 2 × 400 FR w/400 jg
+ 4 × 200 FR w/200 jg +
10 min E
21 20 min E +
steady 3 T + 8
ST + 20 min E
20 min E + 4 × 1 T w/2
min rests + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg
20 min E + 600 FR + 600
jg + 3 × 300 FR w/500 jg
--- PAGE 223 ---
+ 3 × 200 R w/200 jg + 10
min E
22 60 min L run +
8 ST
20 min E + 4 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 8 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
20 min E + 8 × 200 FR
w/200 jg + 20 min E
23 60 min L run +
6 ST
10 min E + 3 × 1 T w/2
min rests + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 20 min E
20 min E + 4 × 200 FR
w/400 jg + 2 × 600 FR
w/1K jg + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
24 50 min L run +
6 ST
10 min E + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 × 1 T w/2
min rest + 2 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
20 min E + ST + important
race day
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
TRAINING ON 50 TO 60 MILES (80 TO
97 KM) PER WEEK
Phase I.    During phase I training, for those who are comfortable running
around 50 or 60 miles (80 to 97 km) each week, running twice on several
days of the week is recommended. This means you may have a second run
on the same day as a Q session. When adding a morning run to your
--- PAGE 224 ---
schedule, make it a minimum of 30 minutes of E running, plus 8 to 10 ST
in the middle of, or after, the run.
Sebastian Coe (right) was not an elite runner at a young age. But thanks to his father’s training
regimen—which Seb described as systematic, progressive, and hard—he would go on to break the
800-meter world record in 1981 and set several standards in other middle-distance events during the
course of his competitive career.
During phase I, runners can determine whether afternoon runs feel better
on the days with or without morning runs. If your daily study or work
schedule is very demanding, try adding morning runs to the days when you
have adequate rest or recovery time throughout the day. Experiment with
which days work best for morning runs; it could be every other day or 2
--- PAGE 225 ---
consecutive days followed by 1, 2, or even 3 days in a row without any
morning runs.
The key is to arrange a running schedule that suits you and to use
morning runs (or second runs at any time of day aside from the Q sessions)
to achieve the desired weekly mileage totals. Always feel free to reduce
total weekly mileage in the case of a health problem or undue stress.
The phase I schedule is basically the same as was presented for those
running about 40 miles (64 km) per week, with the exception that distances
rather than time durations are listed for the Q sessions. Mod (moderately
long) pace is about 20 to 30 seconds per mile faster than typical E (L) pace.
Phase II.    During phase II, make Q1 each week the lesser of 10 miles (16
km) and 25 percent of the week’s total mileage plus 6 ST. Also, add 6 to 8
ST (which can be gradual uphill runs if desirable) to the middle or end of
two of your weekly E runs.
Phase III.    During phase III, make R pace 1 second per 200 (2 seconds
per 400 and 3 seconds per 600) faster than during the last 3 weeks of phase
II training. Set I pace based on recent race and associated VDOT values, or
make I pace 8 seconds per 400 slower than the new R pace. FR (fast
repetitions) are to be 2 to 3 seconds per 200, 4 to 6 seconds per 400, and 9
to 12 seconds per 600 faster than current R pace. T pace is to be 16 seconds
per 400 slower than the new R pace (8 seconds per 400 slower than I pace).
Include eight ST (flat or uphill) during two of your weekly E runs. Mod
(moderately long) pace is about 20 to 30 seconds per mile faster than
typical E (L) pace. Hard (H) is I-pace effort. In any weeks ending in races,
eliminate Q3 of the training plan, and consider races as replacing Q3 for
that week. On low-stress race days (and with adequate time), consider
adding 6 × 200 R w/200 jg after you’re finished racing for the day.
Phase IV.    During phase IV, make R pace 1 second per 200 (2 seconds
per 400 and 3 seconds per 600) faster than during the last 3 weeks of phase
III training. The information for phase III applies for phase IV as well.
Table 11.3 summarizes a 24-week training program for 800-meter runners
who are running 50 to 60 miles (80 to 97 km) per week. For numbers with
--- PAGE 226 ---
no associated distances, assume miles (example: 2 E means 2 miles of easy
running).
Table 11.3    800-Meter Training Plan for 50 to 60 Miles (80 to 97
km) per Week
Phase I
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
1 10 L 3 E + 8 ST + 2 E 3 E + 8 ST + 2 E
2 8 L 3 E + 8 ST + 3 E 2 E + 8 ST + 3 E
3 10 L 3 E + 8 ST + 2 E 3 E + 8 ST + 2 E
4 8 Mod 3 E + 8 ST + 3 E 2 E + 10 ST + 3 E
5 12 L + 6 ST 3 E + 3 Mod + 6 ST 3 E + 10 ST + 2 E
6 8 Mod + 6 ST 4 E + 8 ST + 1 E 2 E + 10 ST + 3 E
Phase II
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
7 10 L + 6 ST 3 E + 10 × 200 R w/200
jg + 3 E
3 E + 12 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 3 E
8 10 L + 6 ST 3 E + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 6 × 400 R w/400 jg
+ 2 E
3 E + 12 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 2 E
9 10 L + 6 ST 3 E + 8 × 400 R w/400
jg + 3 E
3 E + 8 × 200 R w/200 jg +
1 E + 8 × 200 R w/200 jg +
2 E
10 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 5 sets of (200 R +
200 jg + 200 R + 400 jg
+ 400 R + 200 jg) + 2 E
2 E + 8 × 400 R w/400 jg +
2 E
11 10 L + 6 ST 3 E + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 4 × 600 R w/600 jg
+ 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2
E
2 E + 4 ST + 2 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 4 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
12 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 6 × 200 R w/200
jg + 6 × 400 R w/400 jg
+ 2 × 600 R + 2 E
2 E + 6 × 200 R w/200 jg +
8 × 300 R w/300 jg + 2 E
Phase III
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
13 10 L + 8 ST 3 E + 7 × 3 min H (or 6 ×
1K I) w/2 min jg + 6 ×
200 FR w/200 jg + 2 E
3 E + 4 sets of (600 R + 30
sec rest + 200 FR + 1 E) +
3 E
--- PAGE 227 ---
14 2 E + 5 × 1 T
w/2 min rests +
2 E
2 E + 8 × 800 I w/2 min
jg + 6 ST + 2 E
2 E + 600 R + 600 jg + 500
R + 500 jg + 400 FR + 400
jg + 3 × 300 FR w/300 jg +
2 E
15 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 10 × 2 min H w/1
min jg + 1 E + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 4 × 200 FR
w/200 jg + 2 E
3 E + 6 × 400 R w/400 jg +
4 × 300 FR w/300 jg + 2 E
16 2 E + steady 3
T + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 6 × 1K I w/3 min jg
+ 6 ST + 3 E
3 E + 2 × 400 R w/400 jg +
4 × 600 R w/600 jg + 2 ×
300 FR w/300 jg + 2 E
17 10 L + 8 ST 3 E + 5 × 4 min H w/3
min jg + 2 E
3 E + 4 × 400 FR w/400 jg
+ 10 min E + 4 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 2 E
18 2 E + 8 Mod +
6 ST
2 E + 6 × 1,200 I w/3
min jg + 6 ST + 2 E
2 E + 4 sets of (600 R + 30
sec rest + 200 FR + 1 E) +
3 E
Phase IV
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
19 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 4 ST + 3 T + 8 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
3 E + 600 FR + 1K jg +
600 FR + 1K jg + 600 FR +
3 E
20 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 3 × 1 T w/2 min
rests + 6 ST + 2 E
3 E + 600 FR + 1K jg + 2 ×
400 FR w/400 jg + 6 × 200
FR w/200 jg + 2 E
21 3 E + 3 T + 8
ST + 3 E
3 E + 5 × 1 T w/2 min
rests + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
3 E + 600 FR + 600 jg + 4
× 300 FR w/500 jg + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
22 10 L + 8 ST 3 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 10 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
3 E + 6 × 200 FR w/200 jg
+ 1 E + 4 × 200 FR w/200
jg + 3 E
23 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 3 × 1 T w/2 min
rests + 6 × 200 R w/200
jg + 3 E
3 E + 4 × 200 FR w/400 jg
+ 2 × 600 FR w/1K jg + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
24 8 L + 6 ST 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 × 1 T w/2 min rest
+ 2 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2
E
3 E + ST + important race
day
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 228 ---
 
--- PAGE 229 ---
Chapter 12
1,500 Meters to 2 Miles
Never miss a chance to tell teammates they are
doing well.
As is true for many 800 runners who also race seriously over the 1,500-
meter and mile distances, so do many 1,500 and mile runners race seriously
over the 3K and 2-mile distances, so I propose a four-phase training plan
that covers races from 1,500 meters to 2 miles. Some 1,500 runners are
equally dedicated to racing the 800 (and the 1,000-meter distance during
indoor seasons), and the training I outline in this chapter will prepare
runners for a variety of middle-distance events.
The 1,500 is a demanding aerobic event that also relies a great deal on
speed and anaerobic energy systems, and the intensity of a hard-raced 1,500
requires an effort that is about 10 to 12 percent higher than an athlete’s v
O2max. The 3,000-meter and 2-mile distances are run right at an athlete’s
vV·O2max, about the speed used during demanding I training sessions.
In plotting out a season of training for these events, I start phase I
training pretty much the same as I do for the 800, with a good amount of E
running plus some strides (ST) or uphill runs several times a week.
In races that last about 4 to 12 minutes, runners tend to get going too
fast, too soon, so I strongly encourage runners to almost overdo going out
cautiously. One approach to racing the 1,500 or mile, when trying for a
good time (and tactics and adverse weather conditions are not of major
concern), is to run the first 400 meters conservatively and to make the
second 400 about 2 seconds faster than the first. This works well because it
is common for younger runners to go out several seconds too fast, which
results in the second 400 being quite a bit slower than the first.
If you watch a lot of mile races, you may have noticed that the split time
for the third 400 is often equal to the split for the second 400, and so going
--- PAGE 230 ---
out fast for the first minute, followed by a major slowdown after the first
minute usually leads to a slow third 400 and a missed opportunity for a
good time. However, a more cautious first 400 and a focused effort for a
faster second 400 often leads to a good third 400, and then it is just a matter
of hanging on for that final 400. As is true for racing over any distance, it is
beneficial to try a variety of approaches to see what works best for you.
Shelby Houlihan established a new U.S. women’s record in the 1,500-meter event through solid
training and a competitive fire, which she described as wanting to “get out there and rip people
apart.”
--- PAGE 231 ---
I have known many 1,500-meter and mile runners over the years, and I
have made a point of asking how many of them like racing events that are
shorter and how many prefer racing events that are longer than the distance
of their best event. It turns out they like doing both shorter and longer races,
with a little more dedication to racing shorter. There is little doubt that
racing the mile makes the pace of a 2-mile race seem relatively
comfortable, and racing a 2 mile or 3K makes a 1,500 or mile seem like a
fairly short event.
PHASE I
Phase I in any of the programs I recommend is the time to work on easy
mileage, to add strides (ST) to easy days of running, and to be involved in
supplemental training (e.g., light resistance training or circuit training). Try
to avoid running immediately after supplemental exercises; it is better to
run either before this other work or several hours afterward.
Because phase I is primarily E runs and nontimed running, it is easy for
just about everyone to do this phase of training on their own, when it best
fits into the daily schedule. In a school team situation, usually all runners
will be training at the same time. In this case it is important to divide the
team into groups of equal fitness and ability so the not-so-fit runners aren’t
trying to keep up with others who are in much better shape and set a pace
that is too demanding.
PHASE II
I start injecting Q (quality) sessions into the program in this phase of
training, as is typical in all the training programs I put together. These Q
sessions include a weekly L run and a couple of R workouts each week.
Occasionally, runners can start with phase II of training if they have just
come off of a season and are in good aerobic shape. For example, for
runners who have just completed a fall cross country season of training and
racing, that season has eliminated the need for a phase I, and this is a good
time to go back to concentrating on R workouts, as is normal for my phase
II training programs. End-of-season cross country runners are in top aerobic
--- PAGE 232 ---
shape, and time spent working on speed and economy will set them up well
for an indoor track season, which normally involves racing over shorter
distances.
In addition, R training is usually less stressful on the body than I
training. Middle- and long-distance runners often look forward to spending
time with repetition training, seeing it as a break from the demands of
intervals and important races over distances of 5 to 12 kilometers.
PHASE III
I believe phase III is the most demanding phase of the entire season. Along
with the more stressful I workouts, I like to schedule weekly T sessions,
which are good at improving endurance. It could be said that this period of
training will determine how much better a runner will get in the season.
Being willing and able to handle the I sessions without trying to overdo
anything is the key to improvement during this tough phase of training. It’s
always good to remember that the goal of I workouts is to achieve the
maximum benefit from the least amount of work, and this definitely means
relying on the training speeds your recent races have provided through the
VDOT tables.
PHASE IV
During a competitive track season, it is sometimes hard to not overdo the
racing. For runners who are specialists over 1,500, mile, 3K, and 2-mile
distances, the key is to vary the race distances and to be willing to adjust the
training schedule during weeks when you have several races. Try to think of
400-, 800-, and 1,000-meter (and even 1,500 and mile) races as stressing
your anaerobic and speed capabilities more than 3K and 2-mile races do.
So, take advantage of racing a variety of distances, which is a definite
opportunity during track season (unlike the cross country season, when
every race is about the same in duration).
Always be willing to vary scheduled workouts, especially during outdoor
seasons, when weather conditions can have a major effect on what training
will work best, both mentally and physiologically. Also, be willing to
--- PAGE 233 ---
eliminate a scheduled training session if having two Q days in the same
week will bring you into an important Friday or Saturday race inadequately
recovered.
TRAINING ON 30 MILES (48 KM) PER
WEEK
Phase I.    Even though each week includes three Q sessions in phase I,
none of the Q sessions are at all demanding, and I list them as Q sessions
only because there is more than just an E run involved in each. One Q
session is a relatively long L- or Mod-pace run, and the other two Q
sessions include strides (ST), which are 15- to 20-second light, quick runs
that can be done on the flat or up a gradual hill if available, but they are not
meant to be all-out sprints in nature. If doing strides on a hill, try to finish
the final two on a flat area or track so you can feel good leg turnover and
light, quick movement. Always take full recoveries between all strides,
whether uphill or on the flat.
Mod (moderately long) pace is about 20 to 30 seconds per mile faster
than you typically go on E and L runs. On all non-Q days, take an E run of
at least 30 minutes. Use E days to accumulate your desired weekly mileage;
an E day may be no running if you can get in your weekly mileage without
having to run every day. If you have not been running for a period of weeks
before starting phase I, select the minimum amount of running
recommended in the schedule.
Phase II.    During phase II, each week should have an L (Q1) run, usually
on Sunday, but you could also add several miles to the end of a Saturday
session if Saturday is not a stress day. For people running approximately 30
miles (48 km) per week, L runs should be 30 percent of weekly mileage; if
the day after an L run is an E day of training, add six to eight ST to the end
of that E day. Also, add six to eight ST to the end of two other E days of
training each week. As usual, these strides can be on the flat or up a gradual
hill, but be careful coming down from all uphill strides.
In addition to a Q1 L run each week, there are two more Q days for each
week; try to have two E days between these two Q days scheduled each
--- PAGE 234 ---
week. Every second or third week, if all is going well, it would be OK to
add an additional Q session to the week; if you do this, I recommend
repeating Q2 as the additional Q4 session. In any week that you have three
L plus three more Q sessions, the best days might be Sunday (Q1), Monday,
Thursday, and Friday, which would leave Saturday or Sunday for the
weekly L run. In weeks with just two L plus two Q sessions, either Monday
and Thursday or Tuesday and Friday would be the best approach for those
Q2 and Q3 workouts. Have a Q1 L run in weeks 7 through 12. Base R pace
on a conservative estimate of what you think you could currently race for 1
mile.
Phase III.    In phase III, increase R pace by 1 second per 200, 2 seconds
per 400, and 3 seconds per 600, compared with the speeds you were using
in phase II. If that is going well, increase another 1 second per 200 after
finishing the 3rd week of phase III. Either set I pace based on a recent race
VDOT or as 6 seconds per 400 slower than the R pace you have been
handling well.
It is common to start racing during this phase of training. During any
weeks ending with a race, schedule two other Q days for that week on
Monday (or Tuesday) and Wednesday when a race comes Saturday and on
Monday and Tuesday for a Friday race. On relatively easy race days,
consider following your final race of the day with 6 × 200 R w/200 jg to
end that day’s session.
Phase IV.    In phase IV, adjust training paces according to recent race-
predicted VDOT values, or if there have been no races to judge by, increase
all training paces by 1 second per 400 of distance run. It is usual to have a
weekend race most weeks of this training phase, so in weeks 19, 20, and 22,
schedule Q2 and Q3 on Monday and Wednesday for Saturday races and on
Monday and Tuesday for Friday races. Going with back-to-back Q days is
often better than having an E day between two Q days, so I definitely
suggest trying back-to-back Q days (Tuesday and Wednesday before a
Saturday race). Skip Q3 on weeks ending with a Friday or major Saturday
race. Table 12.1 summarizes the four phases of a 24-week training program
for 1,500-meter to 2-mile runners who total about 30 miles (48 km) per
--- PAGE 235 ---
week. For numbers with no associated distances, assume miles (example: 2
T means 2 miles at threshold running).
Table 12.1    1,500-Meter to 2-Mile Training Plan for 30 miles (48
km) per Week
Phase I
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
1 40-60 min L 20 min E + 8 ST +
20 min E
20 min E + 8 ST + 10
min E
2 40-60 min L 30 min E + 8 ST +
10 min E
10-20 min E + 8 ST + 20
min E
3 45 min L 20 min E + 8 ST +
20 min E
20-30 min E + 8 ST + 10
min E
4 40 min Mod 30 min E + 8 ST +
10 min E
20 min E + 10 ST + 20
min E
5 40-60 min L + 6 ST 20 min E + 20 min
Mod + 6 ST
20 min E + 10 ST + 10
min E
6 40 min Mod + 6 ST 30-40 min E + 8 ST
+ 10 min E
10-20 min E + 10 ST +
20 min E
Phase II
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
7 60 min L 20 min E + 8 × 200
R w/200 jg + 10 min
E
10 min E + 10 × 200 R
w/200
jg + 20 min E
8 60 min L 20 min E + 2 × 200
R w/200
jg + 4 × 400 R w/400
jg + 10 min E
20 min E + 10 × 200 R
w/200
jg + 10 min E
9 60 min L 10 min E + 2 × 200
R w/200
jg + 6 × 400 R w/400
jg + 10 min E
10 min E + 6 × 200 R
w/200
jg + 10 min E + 4 × 200
R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
10 60 min L 20 min E + 3 sets of
(200 R + 200 jg +
200 R + 400 jg + 400
R + 200 jg) + 10 min
E
10 min E + 6 × 400 R
w/400
jg + 2 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 10 min E
--- PAGE 236 ---
11 60 min L 20 min E + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 × 600
R w/600 jg + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 10 min
E
10 min E + 4 ST + 600 R
+
600 jg + 2 × 400 R
w/400 jg
+ 4 × 200 R w/200 jg +
20
min E
12 60 min L 10 min E + 2 × 200
R w/200
jg + 2 × 400 R w/400
jg + 2 × 600 R w/600
jg + 15 min E
10 min E + 6 × 200 R
w/200
jg + 4 × 300 R w/300 jg
+ 20 min E
Phase III
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
13 60-70 min L + 8 ST 10 min E + 16 × 200
R w/200 jg + 1 E
20 min E + 4 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 15 min E
14 10 min E + 8 × 400
R w/400 jg + 20 min
E
15 min E + 4 × 800 I
w/3 min jg + 6 ST +
15 min E
20 min E + 3 × 1 T w/2
min rests + 20 min E
15 60-70 min L + 8 ST 20 min E + 4 × 600
R w/600 jg + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 10 min
E
15 min E + 8 × 2 min H
w/1 min jg + 1 mile E + 4
× 200 R w/200 jg + 15
min E
16 20 min E + 8 × 400
R w/400 jg + 15 min
E
20 min E + 4 × 1K I
w/3 min jg + 6 ST +
15 min E
15 min E + steady 3 T +
6 × 200 R w/200 jg + 10
min E
17 60-70 min L + 8 ST 20 min E + 4 × 600
R w/600 jg + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 10 min
E
10 min E + 4 × 800 I
w/400 jg + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 20 min E
18 20 min E + 2 × 600
R w/600 jg + 3 × 400
R w/400 jg + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 10 min
E
15 min E + 4 × 1,200
I w/3 min jg + 6 ST +
10 min E
10 min E + 4 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
Phase IV
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
19 60 min L + 8 ST 10 min E + 4 × 600
R w/600 jg + 15 min
E
20 min E + 2 T + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
--- PAGE 237 ---
20 60 min L + 6 ST 10 min E + 2 × 600
R w/1K jg + 2 × 400
R w/400 jg + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 10 min
E
20 min E + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 4 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 6 ST + 10
min E
21 20 min E + steady 3
T + 8 ST + 20 min E
20 min E + 600 R +
600 jg + 2 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
20 min E + 3 × 1 T w/2
min rests + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg (skip Q3 if
weekend race coming)
22 60 min L + 8 ST 20 min E + 8 × 400
R w/400 jg + 10 min
E
20 min E + 3 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 8 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 10 min E
23 10 min E + 4 × 1 T
w/1 min rests + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 10
min E
20 min E + 2 sets of
(1 T + 400 jg + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg) + 1
E
10 min E + 2 × 1K I w/3
min jg + 4 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 15 min E
(skip Q3 if big race
coming)
24 50 min L + 6 ST 10 min E + 2 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 × 1 T
w/2 min rests + 2 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 10
min E
20 min E + ST +
important race day
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
TRAINING ON 45 MILES (72 KM) PER
WEEK
Phase I.    Even though each week includes three Q sessions in phase I,
none of the Q sessions are at all demanding, and I list them as Q sessions
only because there is more than just an E run involved in each. One Q
session is a relatively long L- or Mod-pace run, and some of the other two
Q sessions include R 200s or strides (ST). Strides are 15- to 20-second
light, quick runs that can be done on the flat or up a gradual hill if available,
but they are not meant to be all-out sprints in nature. If doing strides on a
hill, try to finish the final two on a flat area or track so you can feel good
leg turnover and light, quick movement. Always take full recoveries
between all strides, whether uphill or on the flat.
Mod pace is about 20 to 30 seconds per mile faster than you typically
run on E and L runs. On all non-Q days, just take an E run of at least 30
--- PAGE 238 ---
minutes. Use E days to accumulate your desired weekly mileage; an E day
may be no running if you can get in your weekly mileage without having to
run every day. It is assumed that runners following this schedule have been
running regularly for some weeks, and so the distances suggested are not
too demanding.
Phase II.    During phase II, each week should have an L run (Q1), usually
on Sunday, but you could also add several miles to the end of a Saturday
session if Saturday is not a stress day. For people running approximately 45
miles (72 km) per week, L runs should be 25 percent of weekly mileage; if
the day after an L run is an E day of training, add six to eight ST to the end
of that E day. Also, add six to eight ST to the end of two other E days of
training each week. As usual, these strides can be on the flat or up a gradual
hill, but be careful coming down from all uphill strides.
For Q2 and Q3 days listed for each week, try to have 2 E days between
these 2 Q days. Every 2nd or 3rd week, if all is going well, it would be OK
to add a fourth Q session to the week; if you do this, I recommend repeating
Q1 as the Q4 session. In any week that you have, in addition to L (Q1),
three more Q sessions, the best days for them might be Monday, Thursday,
and Friday, which would leave Saturday or Sunday for the weekly L run. In
weeks with just three Q sessions, Sunday plus Monday and Thursday or
Sunday plus Tuesday and Friday would be best. Schedule a Q1 L run plus 6
ST in each of weeks 7 through 12.
Phase III.    In phase III, increase R pace by 1 second per 200, 2 seconds
per 400, and 3 seconds per 600, compared with the speeds you were using
in phase II. If all is going well, increase another 1 second per 200 after
finishing the 3rd week of phase III. Set I pace either based on a recent race
VDOT or as 6 seconds per 400 slower than the R pace you are currently
handling well.
It is common to start racing during this phase of training. When there are
races at the end of weeks 14, 16, or 18, eliminate either Q2 or Q3 and
schedule only two Q sessions, plus the race, for that week, placing them on
Monday and Wednesday (when a race comes Saturday) or Monday and
Tuesday for a Friday race. On relatively easy race days, consider adding 6 ×
200 R w/200 jg after your final race of the day.
--- PAGE 239 ---
Phase IV.    During phase IV, adjust training paces according to recent
race-predicted VDOT values; if there have been no races to judge by,
increase all training paces by 1 second per 400 of distance run. It is usual to
have a weekend race most weeks of this training phase, so in weeks 19, 20,
and 22, schedule Q2 and Q3 on Tuesday and Wednesday for Saturday races
and skip either Q2 or Q3 when there is a Friday race. Going with back-to-
back Q days is often better than having an E day between two Q days, so I
definitely suggest trying back-to-back Q days before a Saturday race. Table
12.2 provides a summary of suggested training types and days for a 24-
week plan, which can be reduced by some weeks if a full 24 weeks are not
available. For numbers with no associated distances, assume miles
(example: 2 E means 2 miles of easy running).
Table 12.2    1,500-Meter to 2-Mile Training Plan for 45 Miles (72
km) per Week
Phase I
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
1 10 L + 6 ST 3 E + 4 Mod + 8 ST
+ 2 E
3 E + 8 ST + 2 E
2 10 L + 6 ST 4 E + 8 ST + 4 E 3 E + 8 ST + 3 E
3 8-10 L + 8 ST 3 E + 5 Mod + 8 ST
+ 2 E
4 E + 8 ST + 3 E
4 1 E + 8 Mod + 6 ST 2 E + 8 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 3 E
3 E + 8 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 2 E
5 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 8 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 3 E
3 E + 8 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 2 E
6 1 E + 10 Mod + 8
ST
2 E + 8 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 3 E
3 E + 8 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 2 E
Phase II
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
7 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 12 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 1 E + 2 ×
400 R w/400 jg + 2 E
2 E + 6 × 400 R w/200 jg
+ 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2
E
8 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 4 sets of (200
R + 200 jg + 200 R +
200 jg + 400 R +400
jg) + 2 E
2 E + 10 × 200 R w/200
jg + 1 E + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
--- PAGE 240 ---
9 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 6 × 400 R
w/400 jg) + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 1 E + 4 × 600 R w/600
jg + 2 E
10 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 5 sets of (200
R + 200 jg + 200 R +
400 jg + 400 R + 200
jg) + 2 E
2 E + 8 × 400 R w/400 jg
+ 2 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2
E
11 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 4 ST + 2 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 3 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
12 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 6 × 300 R
w/300 jg + 2 E
2 E + 5 × 600 R w/600 jg
+ 2 E
Phase III
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
13 10 L 2 E + 6 × 800 I
w/400 jg + 2 E
2 E + 8 × 400 R w/400 jg
+ 2 E
14 2 E + 5 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 5 × 1K I w/3
min jg + 6 ST + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/2 min
rests + 2 E
15 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 6 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 1 E + 4
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2
E
2 E + 5 × 600 R w/600 jg
+ 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2
E
16 2 E + 8 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1K I w/3
min jg + 6 ST + 2 E
2 E + steady 3 T + 6 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
17 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 6 × 800 I
w/400 jg + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 5 × 600 R w/600 jg
+ 4 × 200 R w/200 jg +2
E
18 2 E + 2 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 3 × 400
R w/400 jg + 4 ×
300 R w/300 jg + 2
E
2 E + 4 × 1,200 I w/3
min jg + 6 ST + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
Phase IV
Q1 Q2 Q3
19 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 5 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 2 E
2 E + 2 T + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 3 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
--- PAGE 241 ---
20 10 L + 6 ST 2 E + 2 × 600 R
w/1K jg + 2 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 3 × 300 R
w/300 jg + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 4 × 400 R w/400 jg + 2
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
21 2 E + 2 × 200 R
w/200 jg + steady 3
T + 6 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 1,200 I + 800
jg + 600 R + 600 jg +
1 T + 400 jg + 2 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/2 min
rests + 6 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E (skip Q3 if
weekend race coming)
22 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 4 sets of (200
R + 200 jg + 200 R +
400 jg + 400 R + 200
jg) + 2 E
2 E + 3 T + 1 E + 6 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
23 2 E + 3 sets of (1 T
+ 400 jg + 2 × 200
R w/200 jg) + 2 E
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 2 × 1K I w/3 min jg
+ 4 × 400 R w/400 jg + 2
E (skip Q3 if weekend
race coming)
24 8 L + 6 ST 2 E + 2 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 3 × 1 T
w/2 min rests + 2 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + ST + important
race day
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
TRAINING ON 60 MILES (97 KM) PER
WEEK
For runners who are running 60 miles (97 km) per week, it is normal to
assume they will have done a fair amount of running before starting this
suggested program. Maybe they have moved up from a lower weekly
mileage program or maybe they have recently taken a break from running
for a couple of weeks, but they are familiar with doing weekly mileage up
around 60 miles.
Phase I.    For those who have been running a fair amount before starting
this four-phase program, phase I may not be necessary, and they can go
directly to phase II. However, if you are comfortable with higher weekly
mileage amounts but have not recently done many quality workouts, it is a
--- PAGE 242 ---
good idea to spend time in the phase I program. It may be only a matter of 2
or 3 weeks in phase I before phase II is more logical.
It is always important to look ahead and see what you will be facing
before deciding how advanced you can afford to be in your training
program. If you have the time and want to build up to faster running, then
go through the phase I program before advancing.
Always consider doing strides (ST) on a gradual uphill path, but also
make a point of running the last couple of strides of any set on the flat.
Many runners who are running 60 miles per week or more will feel more
rested if they run twice on many days of the week. This allows the body to
rehydrate and recover between runs, and you are more likely to feel and
perform better than if trying to get all your daily mileage into one session.
Phase II.    Phase II introduces a fair amount of R training, and usually R
workouts in the afternoon will feel better if they come several hours after a
morning E run. For this reason, I am assuming regular morning runs most
days of each week, and each morning run should be about 30 minutes and
should also include 8 to 10 ST in the middle or at the end. It is better to do
these morning-run strides on the flat. Make Q1 of each week (usually on
Sunday) a comfortable L run of about 10 to 12 miles (16 to 19 km) plus 6 to
8 ST.
Phase III.    In most of my training programs, I like to introduce a fair
amount of I-intensity running in phase III. The I work may involve specific
distances at I pace or hard (H) runs for specified durations of time, and the
idea is always to be working at an intensity you feel you could maintain in a
race lasting about 10 to 12 minutes.
Phase IV.    During phase IV, adjust training paces according to recent
race-predicted VDOT values; if there have been no races to judge by,
increase all training paces by 1 second per 400 of distance run. It is usual to
have a weekend race most weeks of this training phase, so in weeks 19, 20,
and 22, schedule Q2 and Q3 on Tuesday and Wednesday for Saturday races
and on Monday and Tuesday for Friday races. Going with back-to-back Q
days is often better than having an E day between two Q days, so I suggest
trying back-to-back Q days. Use non-Q days and morning miles to
--- PAGE 243 ---
accumulate desired weekly mileage totals. Table 12.3 summarizes the
recommended workouts associated with the four phases of training for
1,500-meter to 2-mile events for runners who total about 60 miles (97 km)
per week. It is OK to reduce the plan by some weeks in each phase if 24
weeks are not available. For numbers with no associated distances, assume
miles (example: 2 E means 2 miles of easy running).
Emphasizing quality over quantity in his training, Hicham El Guerrouj set a world record in the
1,500-meter event in 1998; his unbelievable record of 3:26:00 still stands today. He is considered by
many to be the best distance runner of all time.
--- PAGE 244 ---
Table 12.3    1,500-Meter to 2-Mile Training Plan for 60 Miles (97
km) per Week
Phase I
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
1 10-12 L + 6 ST 2 E + 4 Mod + 8 ST +
2 E
2 E + 8 ST + 8 E
2 1 E + 10 Mod + 6
ST
4 E + 8 ST + 4 E 6 E + 8 ST + 3 E
3 10-12 L + 8 ST 2 E + 5 Mod + 8 ST +
2 E
4 E + 8 ST + 4 E
4 1 E + 8 Mod + 6
ST
4 E + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 3 E
3 E + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
5 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 3 E
3 E + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
6 1 E + 10 Mod + 8
ST
4 E + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 3 E
3 E + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
Phase II
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
7 10-12 L + 6-8 ST 2 E + 5 sets of (200 R
+ 200 jg + 200 R + 200
jg + 400 R + 400 jg) +
2 E
2 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 6 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
8 10-12 L + 6-8 ST 2 E + 6 × 200 R w/200
jg + 4 × 600 R w/600 jg
+ 4 × 200 R w/200 jg +
2 E
2 E + 6 × 400 R w/400
jg + 6 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 2 E
9 10-12 L + 6-8 ST 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 × 800 R w/800 jg
+ 4 × 200 R w/200 jg +
2 E
2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 4 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
10 10-12 L + 6-8 ST 2 E + 5 sets of (200 R
+ 200 jg + 200 R + 200
jg + 400 R + 400 jg) +
2 E
2 E+ 2 × 800 R w/800 jg
+ 2 × 600 R w/600 R + 2
× 400 R w/400 jg + 2 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
11 10-12 L + 6-8 ST 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 3 × 600 R w/600 jg
+ 6 × 200 R w/200 jg +
2 E
2 E + 2 × 400 R w/400
jg + 2 × 600 R w/600 jg
+ 2 × 800 R w/800 jg + 2
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
12 10-12 L + 6-8 ST 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 3 T + 800 E + 4 ×
2 E + 3 sets of (200 R +
200 jg + 200 R + 200 jg
--- PAGE 245 ---
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E + 800 R + 400 jg) + 2 E
Phase III
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
13 5 E + 8 ST + 5 E +
6 ST
2 E + 6 × 800 I w/400
jg + 2 E
2 E + 8 × 400 R w/400
jg + 2 E
14 2 E + 5 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 5 × 1K I w/3 min
jg + 6 ST + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/2 min
rests + 2 E
15 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 6 × 3 min H w/2
min jg + 1 E + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 5 × 600 R w/600
jg + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 2 E
16 2 E + 8 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1K I w/3 min
jg + 6 ST + 2 E
2 E + steady 3 T + 6 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
17 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 6 × 800 I w/400
jg + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg
+ 2 E
2 E + 5 × 600 R w/600
jg + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg
+2 E
18 2 E + 2 × 600 R
w/600 jg + 3 × 400
R w/400 jg + 4 ×
300 R w/300 jg + 2
E
2 E + 4 × 1,200 I w/3
min jg + 6 ST + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
Phase IV
Week Q1 Q2 Q3
19 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 4 × 800 R w/800
jg + 2 E
2 E + 3 T + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 T w/1 min
rests + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
20 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 2 × 600 R w/1K
jg + 2 × 400 R w/400 jg
+ 2 × 600 R w/600 jg +
2 E
2 E + 4 × 400 R w/400
jg + 3 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
21 2 E + 1,200 I + 800
jg + 600 R + 600 jg
+ 1 T + 400 jg + 2
× 200 R w/200 jg +
2 E
2 E + 2 × 200 R w/200
jg + steady 3 T + 6 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/2 min
rests + 6 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E (skip Q3 if
weekend race coming)
22 10 L + 8 ST 2 E + 4 sets of (200 R
+ 200 jg + 200 R + 400
jg + 400 R + 200 jg) +
2 E
2 E + 3 T + 1 E + 8 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
--- PAGE 246 ---
23 2 E + 4 sets of (1 T
+ 400 jg + 2 × 200
R w/200 jg) + 2 E
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
2 E + 2 × 1K I w/3 min jg
+ 4 × 400 R w/400 jg + 2
E (skip Q3 if weekend
race coming)
24 8 L + 6 ST 2 E + 2 × 200 R w/200
jg + 3 × 1 T w/2 min
rests + 2 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E (3 days
prerace)
2 E + ST + important
race day
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 247 ---
 
--- PAGE 248 ---
Chapter 13
5K and 10K
You can’t control what others do, nor can they
control you.
Racing a 5K is very different from racing a 10K, but training can be similar
for both these events. In fact, racing some 5Ks will help performance in a
10K, and 10K races make a 5K seem short. As I tend to feel about all race
distances, the race actually starts about two-thirds of the way through that
particular event. So, in a 5K, you need to be ready to race after the first
couple of miles, and in a 10K, the race really begins at about the 4-mile (6.5
km) mark. Up to that two-thirds point, you need to see how relaxed you can
be while still sticking with the pace (or competitors) that your plan calls for.
Both the 5K and 10K are primarily aerobic events, with most 5K races
performed at about 95 to 98 percent of 
 O2max and 10Ks at about 90 to 94
percent of 
 O2max. To be sure, these are not fun intensities to hold for
prolonged periods, and the mental aspect of these distances is certainly
important.
In chapter 3, I discuss the physiological systems involved in running,
including 
O2max, running economy, lactate threshold, and heart rate. Both
5K and 10K runners need to make sure their training maximizes aerobic
power, economy of movement, and lactate threshold, which requires a good
mix of R running, I training, and T running. These types of training are all
important, but some runners find more success by concentrating on one of
these systems, while others may be better off emphasizing another
approach. This means runners must spend a fair amount of time
emphasizing each of these systems, with the idea of learning which brings
the most return for the time spent doing it.
Figure 3.3 in chapter 3 shows the profiles of three female runners who
all raced at about the same speed in a middle-distance event yet varied a
--- PAGE 249 ---
great deal in 
 O2max and running economy. Sometimes the difference in
physiological values between two runners is a function of inherent
capabilities, and other times it is a result of the training that has been
emphasized. In any case, each type of training must be included in the
program to make sure nothing is overlooked or underemphasized.
Ethiopian runner Kenenisa Bekele (bib 423) exceeded the 5K and 10K feats of fellow countryman
Haile Gebrselassie (bib 426), in part because of his amazing ability to run a final lap in slightly over
50 seconds. He attributed this ability to focused hill and altitude training at a relatively low volume
(80 miles per week).
In the past, it was typical for runners training for a 5K or 10K race to
have already spent a fair amount of time training for shorter distances
before deciding to move up to a longer track event or road race. That has
changed a bit in recent years. Many people taking up the sport today
register for a 5K or 10K race, or even a marathon, as their first serious
event. With this in mind, I present a couple of approaches to training for
one of these longer track or popular road races.
--- PAGE 250 ---
When training for any running event, you should schedule some weeks
of relatively easy running before taking on more specific workouts, and this
initial period of training may have to involve a combination of walking and
running. Chapter 16 outlines a conservative approach to training for a first-
time marathon that also works well for a runner preparing for her first 5K or
10K event. The programs presented in this chapter apply to runners who
have some running background and are interested in moving up to longer
events.
PHASE I
If you plan to start training for a 5K or 10K event and have been recently
training for other running events, you can usually consider this other
training to be sufficient to allow you to move right on to phase II. If you
have had a recent break in training, then I recommend spending 4 to 6
weeks following this phase I program.
As I point out in chapter 2, some basics will serve you well when getting
into a season of training. If you are not in very good shape, you do not have
to run very hard (or very much) to gain big benefits, so take it easy on
yourself. Plan a specific amount of running you think is a reasonable
weekly average, and stick with that number for about 3 or 4 weeks before
increasing to more mileage.
My suggestion for increasing weekly mileage is to go up 1 mile (1.6 km)
every 3rd or 4th week for the number of times you run each week. So, if
running five times each week, go up 5 miles (8 km) when you increase your
weekly mileage. If running two times each day (14 times per week), then I
suggest increasing weekly mileage by a maximum of 10 miles (16 km) after
3 or 4 weeks at your previous mileage.
Because this phase of training is for building up resistance to injury,
when you start increasing the stress of some of your workouts, make sure to
be conservative in your approach. Daily runs should be easy, comfortable
runs; consider 30 minutes to be a good amount to start with. It is also a
good idea to take on supplemental training, which can be in the form of
light resistance work with weights or light plyometrics. I have had good
success with circuit programs, which I explain in chapter 9. When starting
--- PAGE 251 ---
any resistance training program, make sure you work first on technique; do
not increase the resistance until you are comfortable with relatively light
loads.
Three types of run workouts you can do during phase I are E runs, light
uphill runs, and strides (ST), all of which I have referred to earlier. Make
sure any strides you do are not all-out sprints but are light, quick runs that
last about 15 to 20 seconds each, with about 45 to 60 seconds of rest after
each stride.
The same thing applies to any uphill runs you do—keep them
comfortable rather than “blasting” up a hill. It is also possible to do light
bounding up a gradual hill, but in any uphill running you do, be careful
going back down because it is easy to overdo it and bring on a minor impact
injury.
After a couple of weeks of E running, it is a good idea to include one
longer run in each week’s schedule. Make this L run no more than 25
percent of your total weekly mileage. These L runs should be at a
comfortable, conversational pace and should be terminated any time you
start struggling with mechanics.
Remember to be conscious of your stride rate (go for 180 steps per
minute) and breathing mechanics (use a comfortable 2-2 rhythm). To
summarize, in phase I of training, do all runs at an E pace, include one L
run in each week, and add 8 to 10 ST to the middle or end of three or four
of the E runs each week. Also, get going on supplemental training, with the
emphasis on technique and light resistance.
PHASE II
I always recommend that some R training be the first true quality work in
this phase of training. Your runs at R pace should not exceed 5 percent of
your week’s total running mileage. To set the speed at which you run your
repetitions, make a conservative estimate of how fast you think you can
currently race for 1 mile, and make that pace your R pace.
If you are going into this phase of training from having recently raced
other distances, use one of those current race performances to identify the
associated VDOT value and the proper R pace associated with it. You can
--- PAGE 252 ---
also use the tables in chapter 4 to determine some R sessions and how much
to include in each session.
PHASE III
For runners getting serious about 5K and 10K races, this phase of training is
appropriate and can also be demanding. This is where intervals (run at I
pace) become of primary importance, and intervals are not particularly easy
to perform. In each I-pace session, the total amount of running you do at I
pace should not exceed 8 percent of your weekly mileage and not more than
10K regardless of weekly mileage.
Also, two sessions of I training are enough for any single week. As far as
the proper speed for I pace, use a recent race and associated VDOT value; if
you have no races to go by, make I pace 6 to 8 seconds per 400 slower than
the R pace you have recently been using.
PHASE IV
Phase IV is that phase of training that should set you up to perform well
over the 5K and 10K distances. This phase should not be quite as
demanding as phase III, and there will not be as much I training. The main
emphasis now will be on T-pace workouts, with R and I work added now
and then.
If you have the opportunity to race a couple of times during this phase of
training, a 5K may be a good tune-up for a more important 5K or for a
coming 10K event. If you do have a race or two along the way, make sure
to take 2 or 3 E days leading up to these races, which will mean dropping at
least one of your Q training sessions that week.
I also suggest taking one E day after races for each 3K of race distance.
So, take 3 E days after a 10K and 2 E days after a 5K for recovery. More
recovery days will be needed if you happen to run a race that is even longer
(e.g., 5 E days for a 15K).
I am presenting here two 5K/10K training programs but will show only
phases II, III, and IV, with the understanding that you will have already
--- PAGE 253 ---
performed a phase I or are not in need of phase I because you have just
completed a period of training and racing for other events.
One program is for runners who will be accumulating about 40 to 50
miles (64 to 80 km) per week, and the other is for those totaling about 60 to
70 miles (97 to 112 km) per week. More or less mileage can be done, but
these two plans should provide adequate information for designing a
program with higher or lower weekly mileage totals. Remember that E days
are used to accumulate your week’s mileage goals and can be a day off if
needed.
TRAINING ON 40 TO 50 MILES (64 TO
80 KM) PER WEEK
Phase II.    In phase II, weeks 1, 2, 4, and 5 each have an L run, an R
session, and a session including some T and some R work; and weeks 3 and
6 have an M-pace run plus an R session and an H session. As usual I
recommend an emphasis on R work but also introduce a little T work and
occasionally M-pace and I- or H-pace running, the latter of which will get
you prepared for phase III.
Phase III.    In phase III, with any coming Saturday race, either move Q2
and Q3 to Tuesday and Wednesday, or for a more important Saturday race,
eliminate Q2 and make the Q3 session your Q2 that week (place it on
Tuesday).
If you have races in this phase, feel free to adjust your training VDOT
value as races predict, but don’t increase your VDOT any more often than
every 3rd week, even if a race result suggests you should. In this phase, I
alternate weeks of L and M runs and place the other two Q sessions on
back-to-back days, with an I or H day followed by a T or a T and R day.
Phase IV.    During phase IV, it is assumed there will be weekend races. If
there is an upcoming Saturday race, follow what is written in the schedule
and have E days on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday leading up to that
Saturday race. If there is to be a Sunday race, move Q2 to the Wednesday
before the race (and have E days on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, leading
--- PAGE 254 ---
up to the Sunday race). Include warm-up runs before any Q2 and Q3
sessions. Table 13.1 provides three phases of training for races of 5K to
10K in distance, and for runners who total 40 to 50 miles (64 to 80 km) per
week. Although specific days are suggested for Q sessions, days chosen for
Q sessions can be rearranged to suit weather or personal demands. For
numbers with no associated distances, assume miles (example: 2 E means 2
miles of easy running).
Table 13.1    5K to 10K Training Plan for 40 to 50 Miles (64 to 80
km) per Week
Phase II
Week 1
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 2 sets of (8 × 200 R w/200 jg) w/800 jg between
sets + 2 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 2
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 4 sets of (200 R + 200 jg + 200 R + 200 jg + 400
R + 400 jg) + 2 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 6 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 3
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 1 E + 9 M + 6 ST
--- PAGE 255 ---
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 4 × 400 R w/400 jg + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 7 × 2 min H w/1 min jg + 2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Phase II
Week 4
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 4 × 400 R w/400 jg + 1 E + 4 × 400 R w/400 jg + 2
E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + steady 3 T + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 5
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 5 sets of (200 R + 200 jg + 200 R + 400 jg + 400
R + 200 jg) + 2 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 6
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 1 E + 9 M + 6 ST
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 10 × 400 R w/400 jg + 2 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
--- PAGE 256 ---
Friday Q3 2 E + 3 × 3 min H w/2 min jg + 4 × 2 min H w/2 min jg +
2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Phase III
Week 1
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 4 × 1,200 I w/3 min jg + 2 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 2 E
Friday E day + 8 ST
Saturday E day + 6 ST
Week 2
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 1 E + 10 M + 4 ST
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day + 8 ST
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 5 × 1K I w/400 jg + 2 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + 3 T + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Friday E day
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 3
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day + 8 ST
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 6 × 800 I w/400 jg + 2 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 6 ST + 1 E
Friday E day
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 4
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 1 E + 5 M + 1 E + 5 M
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day + 8 ST
--- PAGE 257 ---
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 4 × 1,200 I w/3 min jg + 2 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + 1 T + 2 min rests + 2 T + 1 min rests + 1 T + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 1 E
Friday E day
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 5
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day + 8 ST
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 5 × 1K I w/400 jg + 2 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + steady 3 T + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 1 E
Friday E day
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Phase III
Week 6
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 1 E + 10 M + 6 ST
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day + 8 ST
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 6 × 3 min H w/2 min jg + 2 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 6 ST + 1 E
Friday E day
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Phase IV
Week 1
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); 5 × 1 T w/1 min rests
(if no race) + 2 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 6 × 1K I w/400 jg + 1
E; if Sat race, today is E day.
--- PAGE 258 ---
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Week 2
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); steady 3 mile T (if no
race) + 2 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 5 × 1,200 I w/3 min
jg + 1 E; if Sat race, today is E day.
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Week 3
Q
session
Workout (In any of the next 4 weeks with an
important race, cut L run to 90 minutes)
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); 5 × 1 T w/1 min rests
(if no race) + 2 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 6 × 1K I w/400 jg + 1
E; if Sat race, today is E day.
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Week 4
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); steady 3 T (if no
race) + 1 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 5 × 1,200 I w/3 min
jg + 1 E; if Sat race, today is E day.
--- PAGE 259 ---
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Week 5
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); 2 × 2 T w/2 min rests
between (if no race) + 2 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 6 × 1K I w/400 jg + 1
E; if Sat race, today is E day.
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Phase IV
Week 6
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race)
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 6 × 1K I w/400 jg + 1
E; if Sat race, today is E day.
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
TRAINING ON 60 TO 70 MILES (97 TO
112 KM) PER WEEK
Phase II.    In phase II, weeks 1 and 4 have an L run, an R session, and an
R plus T plus R session; weeks 2 and 5 each have an L run, an R session,
and a session including some T work and some R work; and weeks 3 and 6
have an M-pace run plus an R session and an H session. As usual, I
recommend an emphasis on R work but also introduce a little T work and
--- PAGE 260 ---
occasionally M-pace and I- or H-pace running, the latter of which will
prepare you for phase III.
Phase III.    In phase III, with any coming Saturday race, either move Q2
and Q3 to Tuesday and Wednesday, or for a more important Saturday race,
eliminate Q2 and make the Q3 session your Q2 that week (place it on
Tuesday).
If you have races in this phase, feel free to adjust your training VDOT
value as races predict, but don’t increase your VDOT any more often than
every 3rd week, even if a race result suggests you should. In this phase, I
alternate weeks of L and M runs and place the other two Q sessions usually
on back-to-back days, with an I or H day followed by a T or a T and R day.
Phase IV.    During phase IV, it is assumed there will be some weekend
races. If there is a possible Saturday race, follow what is written in the
schedule. If there is to be a coming Sunday race, move Q2 to the
Wednesday before the race (and have E days on Thursday, Friday, and
Saturday, leading up to the Sunday race). Include warm-up runs before any
Q2 and Q3 sessions. Table 13.2 summarizes phases II, III, and IV for 5K to
10K runners who total 60 to 70 miles (97 to 112 km) per week. Specified
days for Q sessions can be changed to deal with weather or personal
--- PAGE 261 ---
demands. For numbers with no associated distances, assume miles
(example: 2 E means 2 miles of easy running).
Molly Huddle achieved record times for American women in the 5K and 10K through a weekly
training plan averaging around 85 miles and supported by a smart nutritional plan to fuel her
workouts and racing performances.
Table 13.2    5K to 10K Training Plan for 60 to 70 Miles (97 to 112
km) per Week
Phase II
Week 1
Q
session Workout
--- PAGE 262 ---
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 6 × 400 R w/400 jg + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 3 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 2
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 6 sets of (200 R + 200 jg + 200 R + 200 jg + 400
R + 400 jg) + 2 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 6 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 3
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 1 E + 10 M + 6 ST
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 8 × 400 R w/400 jg + 4 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 10 × 2 min H w/1 min jg + 3 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 4
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 2 × 200 R w/200 jg + 10 × 400 R w/400 jg + 1 E +
4 × 200 R w/400 jg + 2 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
--- PAGE 263 ---
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 3 T + 3 min rests + 2 × 1 T
w/1 min rests + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Phase II
Week 5
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 6 sets of (200 R + 200 jg + 200 R + 400 jg + 400
R + 200 jg) + 3 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 6
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 1 E + 10 M + 6 ST
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday Q2 2 E + 12 × 400 R w/400 jg + 2 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST
Thursday E day
Friday Q3 2 E + 2 × 4 min H w/3 min jg + 3 × 3 min H w/2 min jg +
2 × 2 min H w/1 min jg + 2 E
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Phase III
Week 1
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 6 × 1,200 I w/3 min jg + 3 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 2 E (try today, but may
move this workout to Fri or Sat)
Friday E day + 8 ST
Saturday E day + 6 ST
--- PAGE 264 ---
Week 2
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 4 E + 10 M + 4 ST
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day + 8 ST
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 5-8 × 1K I (not to total more than 24 min at I pace)
w/400 jg + 2 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + 3 T + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2 T + 2 E
Friday E day
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Phase III
Week 3
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day + 8 ST
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 8 × 3 min H w/2 min jg + 3 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 1 E
Friday E day
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 4
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 1 E + 8 M + 1 T + 2 M (make this a nonstop workout,
w/no rests between M & T & M)
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day + 8 ST
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 4-6 × 1,200 I (total not more than 24 min H
running) w/3 min jg + 2 E
Thursday E day + 8 ST
Friday E day
Saturday Q3 2 E + 3 × 2 T + 2 min rests + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
Week 5
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day + 8 ST
--- PAGE 265 ---
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 7 × 3 min H w/4 min jg + 2 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + steady 3 T + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 3 T + 2 E
Friday E day
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Week 6
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 1 E + 10 M + 2 E + 6 ST
Monday E day + 10 ST
Tuesday E day + 8 ST
Wednesday Q2 2 E + 2 × 4 min H w/3 min jg + 3 × 3 min H w/2 min jg +
4 × 2 min H w/1 min jg + 2 E
Thursday Q3 2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 2 T + 6 ST + 1 E
Friday E day
Saturday E day + 8 ST
Phase IV
Week 1
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests
(if no race) + 3 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 6 × 4 min H w/3 min
jg + 1 E; if Sat race, today is E day.
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Week 2
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); if no race, do steady
3 T + 2 E + 2 T + 2 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 6 × 4 min H w/3 min
jg + 1 E; if Sat race, today is E day.
--- PAGE 266 ---
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Week 3
Q
session
Workout (In any of next 4 weeks with an important
race, cut L run to 90 minutes)
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests
(if no race) + 2 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 6 × 4 min H w/3 min
jg + 1 E; if Sat race, today is E day.
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Phase IV
Week 4
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); if no race, do steady
3 T + 2 min rests + 2 T + 1 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 8 × 3 min H w/2 min
jg + 2 E; if Sat race, today is E day.
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Week 5
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); if no race, do 2 × 2 T
w/2 min rests between + 2 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
--- PAGE 267 ---
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 10 × 2 min H w/1
min jg + 1 E; if Sat race, today is E day.
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Week 6
Q
session Workout
Sunday Q1 L run of the lesser of 25% of week’s mileage and 120
min, whichever comes first
Monday E day + 6 ST
Tuesday Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests (if Sat race); if no coming race, run
6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 2 E
Wednesday E day
Thursday E day
Friday If no weekend race coming, do Q3: 10 × 2 min H w/1
min jg + 1 E; if Sat race, today is E day.
Saturday If race today, then Q3 is the race; if no race, today is E
day.
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 268 ---
 
--- PAGE 269 ---
Chapter 14
Cross Country
It’s better to start your races too slowly than too
fast.
Several things make cross country a different type of race than is
experienced on a track, or even what is experienced in some road races.
Cross country races involve large fields of competitors and the footing is
varied, from hard surfaces to grass or even mud. In addition, many cross
country courses include running up and down hills of various grades. A
tough stretch of terrain or a headwind will play a role in how the race is run.
Even though wind is a factor in track races, the wind varies from
headwind to tailwind during each lap around the track. In a cross country
race, you may have to run against a headwind for several minutes at a time,
and how that affects race strategy can be a major factor. You are better off
drafting off of others when going into a wind because the same running
pace would cost more energy if you were by yourself or leading a group of
runners.
In some not-so-well-designed courses, the trail over which you are
running may become quite narrow, allowing no more than one or two
runners to run abreast, which stretches out the field of runners considerably.
Before a cross country race, you will need to consider all the factors you
may face. It is important to have an opportunity to go over the course on the
day of competition (so you know what situations you will face on that
particular day and when you might face them).
When training for cross country, certainly some if not most of the
training should be conducted over typical terrain. It is difficult to race over
soft footing if all your training has been performed on a track or hard road
surface. Try to plan cross country training on surfaces similar to those you
will experience in the most important races of the season.
--- PAGE 270 ---
When it comes to I training, some runners will get more out of running
for durations of time rather than distance, especially if the training route is
over difficult or hilly terrain. Trying to hit specific times for designated
distances can be rather disappointing if the footing is poor or hilly. In a way
this makes I training for cross country like I training at altitude—rather
than being disappointed for not hitting desired speeds for your work bouts,
you will know you are working hard for a set amount of time, and that is
accomplishing the purpose of the workout.
A nine-time USA Cross Country champion, Lynn Jennings began her running career by joining the
boys’ cross country team when she was in ninth grade. She excelled by doing interval training on
grassy fields, doing fartlek and tempo training on roads, and embracing the variable weather and
footing conditions inherent in the sport.
--- PAGE 271 ---
If a major race is to be conducted over your home course, then make a
plan on how best to take advantage of your course in areas that might be
difficult for the competition. For example, knowing how you react to a
particular hill and what follows that hill can make it easier for you to know
when to relax and when to push it a little without the effort hurting you as
much as someone who has never raced that course before.
Setting a team strategy for a race can be a challenge. In some easy races,
it can help new runners to try running along with several others—running in
a pack, as it is often referred to. Pack running often works well for the first
third or so of a race, at which point the better runners can break away from
slower teammates to see how well they can do in the latter stages of the
race. Sometimes this approach works to the benefit of both the better
runners and those who are less experienced because it keeps the better
runners from going out too fast and helps the slower runners improve in
confidence and tactics.
USING A CONSERVATIVE-START
APPROACH
A major way that most cross country races vary from track races is how fast
the field goes out at the start. It is very common, especially in high school
cross country races, for the fastest few runners to all go out too fast. They
often end up slowing a fair amount because of their too-fast start, but they
still win because everyone else also went out too fast to stay with the pack.
So, the winner goes out too fast but still wins and therefore decides that
going out fast is the best way to win a race. When one of the runners who is
pretty good goes out at a more reasonable pace, that runner will beat the
better runners who go out too fast.
I have always encouraged a more moderate beginning pace, and I saw
the benefits of this approach one year at our national championship meet. I
measured off the first 400 meters of the course, and the last thing I asked
my women’s team to do in preparation for the race was to run a solid 800
meters, going through that first 400 in 85 seconds, which would be about a
17:42 5K if held the whole way. I encouraged them to not go any faster
--- PAGE 272 ---
when the race began, which was to be about 8 to 10 minutes after
completing that solid 800 warm-up run.
When the race started, my seven runners all went through that first 400
between 84 and 87 and were the last seven runners in the field of more than
180 runners. Some of the front runners went out in under 75, and all others
were between 75 and 82 at that first 400 mark. At the first 1-mile mark, one
of my runners was leading the entire pack, and she went on to win by more
than 20 seconds (with a time of about 17:20). My next runners placed 5th,
8th, 15th, and 26th, and winning the team title was a cinch.
Following are a few things to keep in mind when using this
conservative-start approach:
Often, especially in high school races, the course narrows very early
in the race, and this can make it tough to move past the fast-start
leaders. You get squeezed back and often lose confidence that you
can still catch up. However, there is usually plenty of time to make
a move during the middle mile of a 5K race, even after getting
boxed out early, and battling the field to get a front spot early can
take a lot of reserve energy that could better serve you later on.
It is common for relatively young runners who try the slow-start
approach to become mentally discouraged when they see a mass of
others out in front of them just a couple of minutes into the race.
However, if the coach holds practice sessions that involve a
conservative start and practice this tactic in some early-season
races, these young runners will quickly realize the benefits of such
an approach. The day they are more cautious but still confident they
will catch up with many of the too-fast starters, there will be a lot of
happy runners on the team.
A tactic that works well is to pass as many runners as possible (even
to the extent of counting each runner passed) during the middle
mile of the race. I am not particularly impressed with runners who,
in the middle of the pack, outkick two or three others in the final
100 meters of a race, because this often means they were not
working very hard in the middle of the race. According to my math,
--- PAGE 273 ---
passing 20 others during the middle of the race and getting
outkicked by 3 runners in the final sprint means you helped your
team score by 17 points, whereas not passing any in the middle mile
and outkicking 3 at the end means you gained 3 points for your
team. Which approach produces the better team score is not hard to
realize.
Remember, if you are running with a good number of runners in the
middle of a cross country race and you aren’t feeling particularly strong,
you must realize all those others near you are also feeling as bad as you are
or they wouldn’t be with you—they would be running on by and leaving
you behind.
An additional comment relative to going out fast in cross country races
relates to how the initial pace seems to keep getting faster and faster the
more important the race is. In other words, a conference race may go out
too fast, but a regional championship goes out even faster, and the state or
national championship goes out faster again, even if the competition
involves the same group of runners you just faced last week. To me this
says that controlling your pace at the start becomes more and more
important as you progress into the championship portion of the season.
PREPARING FOR THE RACE
Coaches should not assume all the runners on a team are equal and must all
follow the same warm-up routine. It doesn’t make a lot of sense for all team
members to run together in their warm-up unless they all have equal race
times, and even then some do better with more, or less, activity than others.
Does it sound like equal treatment and equal preparation for a 4:30 miler
to be going through the same warm-up routine as a teammate whose best
mile is 5:30? Ideally, coaches will design a warm-up especially for each
member of the team. I sometimes chuckle to myself when I see entire
teams, all dressed in their clean team warm-up suits, jogging together,
staying within arm’s length of each other, then stretching and striding
together, all being treated as equal performers.
Each runner and every coach should experiment with a variety of warm-
up routines to see which works best for which members of the team.
--- PAGE 274 ---
Chances are the entire team doesn’t finish each race within a few strides of
each other, and they probably don’t all respond similarly to the same warm-
up approach. Some runners don’t feel ready to go until they have run a few
miles, while others start getting tired of warming up after a much shorter
run.
A warm-up should prepare each participant, both physiologically and
mentally, for the task ahead, which means some serious thought needs to be
part of the process. For some runners this means being alone, and for others
it means running with a group. In my years of coaching, I have experienced
athletes who didn’t even want to talk or make eye contact with me during
the final hour or so leading up to a race, while others wanted my attention
right up to the time the gun went off.
A mental approach that works well for some runners is to go over in their
minds a race in which they had a particularly positive experience. They
remember what made that race so pleasing, and they can rerun that good
race in their minds in a matter of 10 or 15 seconds just before the start of
any new race. In other words, focus on positive experiences. Sometimes
you can even rerun a disappointing race, with changes in the approach that
would result in a more positive effort.
What about the physiological warm-up for a race? First of all, weather
plays a significant role in the process. Cold weather demands that you wear
more clothing until you get the muscles heated up some, but going with
minimal clothing is necessary on a hot day so you don’t become overheated
and dehydrated before the race begins.
Most runners can feel when their muscles are warmed up and when they
need a little more time going easy or going hard. It typically takes about 10
minutes for the running muscles to start increasing their temperature. A
couple of degrees will aid performance, but increasing muscle temperature
more than a couple of degrees can lead to subpar performance. For a
relatively long race, you certainly don’t want to start the race with the body
temperature too high or you will quickly become overheated. Just as
different runners lose fluids at different rates, so do some warm up more
quickly than others, and each member of a team needs to experiment with
--- PAGE 275 ---
different warm-up routines to see which works best under different
environmental conditions.
Beyond the best warm-up approach is the approach in the race itself, and
here it is particularly important to focus on the task at hand. In other words,
it is better to think about what you are doing (breathing rhythm and stride
rate are two good things to think about) than to worry about how much
farther you have to go or how far you have gone so far. Don’t worry about
runners you have beaten in earlier races being in front of you because they
may be pacing their races poorly and will pay for it later.
It is also always possible that someone you have beaten earlier is having
a particularly great day. You can’t judge your race by what others are doing;
judge by what you are doing and what you are feeling. Some runners like to
charge up hills; I prefer asking my runners to see how little effort they can
put into staying with others on uphill runs and then to concentrate on a solid
effort after reaching the top of the hill, when others are often backing off to
recover. I have told my runners to concentrate on a solid pace while
counting 50 footfalls after reaching the top of the hill. After the 50 footfalls,
runners have often recovered well from the hill while moving ahead of
others.
I often encourage runners to practice using a good 2-2 breathing rhythm
for the first two-thirds of their early-season races so this becomes a normal
approach during more important races. How you feel or how you perceive
your effort in a race is very important, and learning to go by feel helps a
great deal in cross country races, especially when faced with varying terrain
and maybe wind and mud, which can slow the pace considerably. Again,
focus on the task at hand, and don’t worry about times you hear along the
way; who knows, they may not even be accurate representatives of the
distance run.
DEVELOPING A SEASON PLAN
In most school situations, there are only 10 or 12 weeks for an entire cross
country season, which certainly doesn’t allow for four 6-week phases of
training during the season. As I mentioned in chapter 10 in regard to setting
up a season, you have a couple of options for dealing with only 10 or 12
--- PAGE 276 ---
weeks for cross country. My preferred approach is to encourage the runners
to complete all of phase I and phase II during the summer, before the start
of school in the fall. This makes it possible to go into the third phase of
training when school begins.
For those who are new or who didn’t get in much running in the summer,
it is a must to spend time in phase I training, with little or no phase II
training once school begins. These runners will get in some base work
before hitting the more demanding I work and early-season races. The
training plan I outline in this chapter contains four 6-week phases, with the
understanding that parts (or even all) of phase II will be eliminated and a
couple weeks of phase I also cut.
It is a must to adjust how much of each type of quality running each
runner on the team performs, based on each person’s weekly mileage. For
example, I limit how much training is done in an I session to the lesser of 8
percent of weekly mileage or 10K. A runner who is running 30 miles (48
km) a week is limited to 2.4 miles (8 percent of 30) at I pace during any
single I session; another runner who is totaling 60 miles (97 km) per week
can run as much as 4.8 miles (8 percent of 60) at I pace in a single I
session.
I also use a 5 percent rule for R sessions and a 10 percent rule for T
sessions. Keep in mind that these suggested limits are per session, not per
week; so if you have two R sessions in a single week, each session could go
up to the suggested maximum. Also, realize that these percent values are
not required amounts but suggested maximums that should not be exceeded.
Phase I
Plan on an L run on Sunday of each week, but limit that run to be the lesser
of 30 percent of weekly mileage and 60 minutes. For the remaining days of
each week, get in a minimum of 30 minutes of E running, and make the
most you run in any day not more than 25 percent of the week’s total
mileage.
Runners who haven’t been doing much running lately, or who are
relative beginners, might consider phase IV of the white plan outlined in
chapter 8 as their phase I for cross country season. The following is better
--- PAGE 277 ---
suited for runners who haven’t had a long break in training and who are not
beginners. If you haven’t been running for more than 4 weeks, eliminate an
L run and keep weekly mileage down to about 20 miles (32 km) for 3
weeks and then at about 25 to 30 miles (40 to 48 km) for the next 3 weeks.
Table 14.1 lays out a simple phase I training plan that can be shortened if 6
weeks are not available, but for relative beginners should be used for at
least 3 or 4 weeks.
The legendary Steve Prefontaine, whose racing attitude was “Someone may beat me, but they are
going to have to bleed to do it,” trained with a similar tough-mindedness. His 30/40 workout sessions
consisted of 3 miles of alternating 200 meters run in 30 seconds and 200 meters run in 40 seconds,
and he did Sunday runs of 15 to 17 miles.
--- PAGE 278 ---
Table 14.1    Phase I Training Plan for Cross Country
Weeks 1-3
Day Workout
Sunday L run of the lesser of 60 min and 30% of week’s
total mileage
Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and
Friday
E days of about 30 min each day
Wednesday and Saturday 30-40 min E + 6 ST
Weeks 4-6
Day Workout
Sunday L run of the lesser of 60 min and 30% of week’s
total mileage
Monday, Tuesday, and Friday E days of about 30-40 min each day
Wednesday, Thursday, and
Saturday
20 min E + 8 ST + 10 min E
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
Phase II
All who are training in this phase should have had some consistent running
during the past several weeks and should be ready for some light R training.
Each runner’s total weekly mileage for this phase should not be greater than
10 miles (16 km) more than was covered in the final 3 weeks of phase I
training. In addition, each runner is to limit the amount of running at R pace
(in any session of R-pace running) to no more than 5 percent of the week’s
total mileage or not more than 5 miles (8 km) if doing more than 100 miles
(160 km) per week.
Refer to table 4.4 in chapter 4 for choices of workouts based on the
amount of weekly mileage accumulated. For example, runners who are
getting in about 35 miles per week should select from the R sessions listed
under category B, and runners getting in about 50 miles a week choose
from category C or D. Use E days to accumulate desired weekly total
mileage, and if mileage is not very high, an E day may be a day off now
and then.
R workouts can be performed either on flat terrain or as uphill runs.
Consider that uphill running helps improve speed and economy, and if
--- PAGE 279 ---
important races late in the season are to be held on hilly terrain, then it is
particularly important to make some R sessions on a hill. Obviously, the
speed will be slower on uphill runs, but go by feel and don’t worry about
how far you run; use time as the measuring factor.
For example, maybe today’s workout is an R session that involves eight
60-second uphill runs with full recovery during the return to the bottom.
Make sure the route back down is not steep because downhill running puts a
lot of stress on the legs. I also like to finish a hill R session with a few flat
R runs so the runner gets the feeling of moving fast again after the
relatively slower uphill runs. I like to avoid uphill training during the final
couple of weeks before an important race because this usually allows for a
little better recovery from the stress of the uphill runs.
I provide three options (R1, R2, and R3) for scheduling Q (R) sessions
during each week. Try to keep L runs down to less than 25 percent of
weekly total mileage, and cut any L run short if your mechanics start to
deteriorate.
During any week when there is a race scheduled on Tuesday, if
following R1 or R3 schedules, switch to R2 for that week, making Q1 the
Tuesday race, and keep Q2 the day after the race and Q3 on Saturday. In
any weeks with a Friday race, follow the R3 schedule, but move Q2 from
Wednesday to Tuesday, and the Friday Q3 is replaced by the race. For
weeks with a Saturday race, follow the R2 schedule as it is, with the
Saturday race replacing Q3.
In terms of where to train, I strongly recommend doing all Q sessions on
the type of terrain on which the most important races of the season will be
held—usually grass or dirt. E runs and L runs can be on roads or smooth
paths. If important races are to be run on hilly courses, consider doing one
or two Q sessions over partly hilly terrain, but try to always run the final
couple of R-pace runs on flat footing. Basically, try to have 2 E days before
any race (consider L being E-pace running), and during this early part of
the season, don’t hesitate to do a desired Q session the day after a race.
Table 14.2 summarizes the three approaches (R1, R2, R3) to training during
phase II of the season.
--- PAGE 280 ---
Table 14.2    Phase II Training Plan for Cross Country
Day R1 R2 R3
Sunday L run L run L run
Monday Q1 E day + 8 ST Q1
Tuesday E day + 8 ST Q1 E day + 8 ST
Wednesday E day + 8 ST Q2 Q2
Thursday Q2 E day + 8 ST E day + 8 ST
Friday Q3 E day + 8 ST Q3
Saturday E day + 8 ST Q3 E day + 8 ST
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
Phase III
As I have indicated earlier, phase III is the most stressful of the various
training phases, and there are often races thrown into this phase, and races
will always replace a Q session in the week of a race. Refer to table 4.3 in
chapter 4, and base the amount of running performed in any I session on
total weekly mileage (which is shown for each of the various I workouts
listed).
Also, do not include distances of the I-pace runs that will make you go
longer than 5 minutes per work bout. For example, if a runner has a VDOT
that dictates a 6:00 mile pace for I runs, don’t have that runner run I miles;
1,200s would be the longest, but you could go up to 5-minute H runs if
running more for time than for distance.
Phase III is set aside for a weekly I session, so make that session the first
Q session of the week, after the L run that was performed over the
weekend. It is also normal to have a race most weeks during this phase of
training, and races are similar in physiological benefit to what is
accomplished with a solid I session, so I prefer making Q1 the I session and
Q2 a T session that ends with some R 200s or strides.
I like to include T running during a cross country season during both
phase III and phase IV, and even though you will be racing over varied
terrain, I prefer doing T workouts on a flat surface so it is easier to control
the pace at which the workout is being run. It is possible to run over
undulating terrain and use a heart-rate monitor to keep track of effort, but I
--- PAGE 281 ---
prefer avoiding heart-rate monitors because they do not always reflect the
speed desired for a particular workout.
If there is no race scheduled during a week of phase III, then it is OK to
include a Q3 if you are feeling good, and the best thing would be either an I
session based on time (e.g., 5 or 6 × 3 min H w/2 min jg) rather than
distance (e.g., 5 × 1,000 I w/2 min jg), or a combination of T, I, and R (e.g.,
2 T + 3 × 2 min H w/1 min jg + 4 × 200 R w/200 jg). My favored schedule
during phase III is outlined in table 14.3.
Table 14.3    Phase III Training Plan for Cross Country
Day Workout
Sunday L run
Monday E day + 8 ST
Tuesday Q1: I session
Wednesday Q2: T session + 4 × 200 R
Thursday E day
Friday E day
Saturday Q3: T-I-R or race
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
If there is a Tuesday race, that race replaces the scheduled Q1 session,
and if there is a Saturday race, that race replaces the scheduled Q3 session.
If there is a Friday race, drop Q2 on Tuesday, make Q2 the Friday race, and
drop Q3 on Saturday.
Table 14.4 shows an example of how I would suggest plotting a 40-mile
week (1) with no race that week, (2) with a Saturday race, and (3) with
Tuesday and Saturday races. For numbers with no associated distances,
assume miles (example: 2 E means 2 miles of easy running).
Table 14.4    Options for Phase III 40-Mile (64 km) Weeks
Day No race week
Saturday race
week
Tuesday and
Saturday race week
Sunday 10 mile L run + 6
ST
10 mile L run + 6 ST 50 min L run + 6 ST
Monday E day + 8 ST E day + 8 ST E day
--- PAGE 282 ---
Tuesday 2 E + 5 × 1K I w/2
min jg + 2 E
2 E + 5 × 1K I w/2
min jg + 2 E
Race day
Wednesday 1 E + 4 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 2 E
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/2
min rests + 1 E
1 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 E
Thursday E day + 8 ST E day + 8 ST E day + 8 ST
Friday E day E day E day
Saturday 2 E + 4 × 4 min H
w/3 min jg + 2 E
Race day Race day
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
Phase IV
There are often weekly races during phase IV training, and these races are
usually important, with the need to be relatively rested. In general, for a less
important Saturday race, I suggest following the phase III schedule for a
week with a Saturday race (table 14.4). For an important Saturday race, I
recommend a moderately long Sunday L run and a T-type workout on
Tuesday (table 14.5). All other days are E days, and I even tend to stop
doing strides after late-week E runs. Table 14.5 summarizes the ways of
dealing with phase IV training weeks that have no races or those with an
important weekend race.
Table 14.5    Phase IV Training Plan for Cross Country
Day No race week Important Saturday race week
Sunday 10 mile L run + 6 ST 50-60 min L run + 6 ST
Monday E day + 8 ST E day + 8 ST
Tuesday 2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests + 4 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 1 E
Wednesday E day + 8 ST E day + 6 ST
Thursday E day + 8 ST E day
Friday 2 E + 4 × 1,200 I w/3
min jg + 2 E
E day
Saturday E day Race day
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
In summary, when training for cross country races, keep the following
things in mind.
--- PAGE 283 ---
Get in a weekly L run, preferably on Sunday of each week.
Do much of your Q training sessions on grass or dirt trails that are
similar to race conditions.
Try to get in 2 E days of running before most midseason races
entered.
Make your last Q session before a weekly race mostly of T
intensity.
Remember that races provide similar benefits to I sessions.
Stop hill work for the last several weeks leading up to important
races.
Runners should have a reasonable goal for each race entered.
Avoid trying to train harder during the final few weeks of the
season.
Start races conservatively, and be willing to work harder as the race
progresses.
Focus on the task at hand.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 284 ---
 
--- PAGE 285 ---
Chapter 15
15K to 30K
Pay more attention to time spent training than to
distance covered.
Races that are of distances from 15K to 30K are not typical track events,
and much of the training is done on the road, where the races are normally
held. However, it is desirable to do most, if not all, of your R training on a
track where you can compare times over specific distances with times you
have done in the past. It is also beneficial to do some of your I training on a
track, but I suggest trying to do most of your T runs on the road, to avoid
boredom if for no other reason. To accommodate the primary purpose of T
runs, I recommend you find fairly flat roads to run on so you can maintain a
constant running speed throughout the T runs.
There is no question that following a successful 10K training plan will
prepare any runner quite well for races in the 15K to 20K range, and
marathon training is adequate for getting ready for a 25K or 30K race. In
fact, for relative novice runners, I suggest following the novice marathon
program in chapter 16 before going into the training program I am
presenting in this chapter. That said, the program here applies to runners
who have been doing a fair amount of training and are ready to get serious
about one of the distances from 15K to 30K.
I am presenting a rather generic “alien” training plan, and each runner is
encouraged to pick workouts to fit the types of training sessions
recommended in the plan. For example, I may say that a particular workout
is to be an R session, and you are free to pick a workout from the list of R
sessions found in table 4.4. First, you should look up your current VDOT
value from the tables in chapter 5, based on a recent race or estimated race
time, then decide which set of R workouts apply to you, based on VDOT
and current weekly mileage (remember that the amount of R-pace running
--- PAGE 286 ---
in a single session should not exceed the lesser of 8K (5 miles) or 5 percent
of your weekly running mileage). The same thing applies to I runs (the total
amount of running you do in a single I-pace session should not exceed the
lesser of 10K or 8 percent of your weekly mileage). T runs should total no
more than 10 percent of your weekly mileage. Refer to the tables in chapter
4 to pick specific workouts.
I first met Sara Hall (left) after her sophomore year in high school. I enjoyed the opportunity to
improve her training and hopefully contributed to the success she has enjoyed in her running career.
ALIEN TRAINING
I have designed a workout plan for the variety of race distances covered in
this chapter that is somewhat different from what I usually suggest, and I
have called this my alien training plan. This plan assumes the runner who
will follow it has been running regularly for a while. It also assumes the
runner is familiar with the types of training I offer (E, L, M, T, I, H, and R)
and with how to adjust the speeds (determined by VDOT values) and
amounts of these types of training, as outlined in chapter 4. This
understanding will allow the runner to determine the details of each
workout presented. In other words, if I say that a particular workout is to be
--- PAGE 287 ---
an R session, the runner knows the speed, recovery, and the maximum
amount of running to do at R pace and can select a session from those
presented in chapter 4. I suggest a type of workout and the runner
determines the details of that training session. You will notice that the alien
program does not go through a series of training phases; rather, it presents a
series of workouts that are repeated every 2 weeks.
After trying alien training for a few weeks, you might find that it works
well for you and may even be a good program to follow when training for a
race shorter than 15K or longer than 30K. In fact, I think it may be a good
marathon-training program for some runners (see my 18-week marathon
training program for novices in table 16.2).
In the alien program shown in table 15.1, I list 7 training days for the
week (day 1 through day 7), and the 2-week schedule presented is repeated
as many times as desired. You decide which day of any week best suits your
schedule. I usually think of Sunday as being day 1, which is Q1 of each
week, with Q2 on Tuesday and Q3 on Friday, but your schedule may dictate
different days for you. All I suggest is that you keep Q1, Q2, and Q3 in the
order they are written and schedule E days between the Q sessions. Notice
that I have suggested adding strides (ST) to a couple of E days each week.
Do what you feel is adequate for the warm-up and cool-down associated
with each Q session. When you are within a week of a race, switch to the
prerace week. Prerace weeks and the following recovery period are the only
time that the program is varied. Therefore, following any race, take 1 E day
of running for every 3K of race distance; for example, if a race was 15K,
take 5 E days for recovery before returning to the alien program and 7 E
days following a half marathon.
Table 15.1    Alien Program
Day Q session Workout
Weeks 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and beyond
1 Q1 L run
2 E day + 8 ST
3 Q2 T session
4 E day + 8 ST
--- PAGE 288 ---
5 E day
6 Q3 R session
7 E day
Weeks 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and beyond
1 Q1 M run
2 E day + 8 ST
3 Q2 T session
4 E day + 8 ST
5 E day
6 Q3 I session
7 E day
Prerace week
Race − 6 days Q1 2/3 of normal L run
Race − 5 days E day
Race − 4 days E day
Race − 3 days Q2 3 × 1 T w/2 min rest
Race − 2 days E day
Race − 1 day E day or day off
Race day Q3 Race day
Recovery week
Number of recovery days depends on race length (1 day per 3K of race distance). Pick
up next Q day as appropriate and complete that week.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 289 ---
 
--- PAGE 290 ---
Chapter 16
Marathon
Run with your brain the first two-thirds of every
race and finish with your heart.
Probably the most important thing I have learned about marathon training
(or training for almost any running event, for that matter) is that each runner
needs to have an individualized program. Some handle higher amounts of
mileage, and some can’t handle a tough Q session as often as others can
handle the same work schedule. Then there are the raw beginners, including
people who have never run or even ever performed any type of physical
activity before taking up a marathon program.
In this chapter on marathon training, I provide six different approaches
to the event, and within each of these approaches are a few variations
relative to the amount of weekly mileage (or time spent running) that any
person might be able to, or have the time to, handle. These approaches, with
their prominent features and tips for choosing the program best for you, are
shown in table 16.1.
Remember, each of us may react a little differently to the same training
program, and there probably is not a single training program that is best for
everyone. Always eat well, stay hydrated, get adequate rest, and believe that
the training you are doing is not only helping you run better but also
improving your health. Just running for the fun of it can make the day
enjoyable, and I certainly hope everyone who spends time running enjoys it
as much as I enjoy helping others with their running.
Table 16.1    Six Approaches to Marathon Training
Program Features Reason for choosing the program
Novice Training 3-5 days per
week
You are a beginner runner or have little
previous running training to rely on.
--- PAGE 291 ---
2Q Two Q sessions per
week
You have been running fairly regularly.
You are able to set aside 2 days each
week for a more demanding Q session of
training.
4-week
cycles
Two Q sessions per
week for 3 of every 4
weeks, with a 4th
week of only E running
You like having 2 Q sessions each week.
You also like the idea of a high-mileage
week with no Q sessions every 4th week
of the program.
5-week
cycles
5 weeks of training
that can be repeated
as often as time allows
You are interested in regular L and M-
pace runs while concentrating on T runs.
This plan also keeps some R and I work
in your training plan.
This plan allows you to select specific
workouts designed for runners logging a
variety of distances.
This can be a demanding program, so it
is recommended that for the final 3 weeks
before a marathon, you follow what is
provided for runners in your mileage
category in table 16.3.
Final 18
weeks
Programs based on
miles, kilometers, or
time
You like having the opportunity of
scheduling your training based on miles,
kilometers, or maybe on time, rather than
distances being run.
These programs are typically for runners
who are logging a lot of mileage and
prefer not to have 2 Q sessions each
week.
Q sessions are scheduled for every 4th or
5th day, so some weeks have only one
and others have two Q sessions.
Final 12
weeks
Some fairly
demanding final weeks
prior to a marathon
You have been training regularly and
would prefer a program that provides
training for the final 12 weeks before your
chosen marathon.
NOVICE TRAINING
There are probably more people who fit into the novice category than any
other. As a coach, I consider this group to include two basic types of people
—true beginners, who have never had any running training, and those who
have done a fair amount of running training in the past, but it was years ago
--- PAGE 292 ---
and they want to get back into it again carefully. I like to call this second
group “Reruns.”
It is most important that Reruns don’t try to duplicate what they used to
be able to do, at least until they have built up a reasonable base from which
to work. Injuries tend to plague Reruns more than they bother new
beginners, because the true beginners don’t know what is possible, and
every bit of improvement is better than they ever imagined.
Table 16.2 shows an 18-week plan for novice runners. Weeks 18 through
10 are designed for training 3, 4, or 5 days each week (4 or 5 is preferable).
If training 3 days a week, do sessions A, C, and E, with at least 1 day
between each session. If training 4 days a week, do sessions A, C, E, and
either B or D. If training 5 days a week, do all sessions. Strides (ST) are
runs that last 15 to 20 seconds each at a comfortably fast pace that you
might be able to race at for 1 mile; take 45- to 60-second rests between
strides. T-pace running is comfortably hard running at a pace you could
keep up for at least 30 minutes.
During week 10, try to complete a steady 10K run. If you run the 10K as
a race, make sure to take it very easy. Coming into the final 9 weeks, try to
bump up or keep training for 5 days a week. There should be two weekly Q
sessions during this last period. Fit these Q sessions in on days with nice
weather and when you have a lot of time. Separate the two Q sessions by at
least 2 E days. The other 5 days of each week should be E days, including
potential rest days or E running for at least 30 minutes.
Table 16.2    18-Week Marathon Training Plan for Novices
18-16 weeks until race
Session Workout
A 15 1 min easy runs, w/1 min walks between runs (written 15 × 1:00 E
w/1:00 W)
Above workout (WO) is the first of the week, to be done either yesterday
or today.
B If you run today, repeat the previous workout.
C 9 × 1:00 E w/1:00 W + 3 × 2:00 E w/2:00 W
D If you run today, repeat the previous workout.
E 9 × 1:00 E w/1:00 W + 2 × 3:00 E w/3:00 W
--- PAGE 293 ---
Above WO was to be last of the week and was to be either yesterday or
today.
15-14 weeks until race
Session Workout
A 4 × 5:00 E w/ 5:00 W
Above WO is the first of the week, to be done either yesterday or today.
B If you run today, repeat the previous workout.
C 10 × 2:00 E w/2:00 W
D If you run today, repeat the previous workout.
E (–15 weeks) 5 × 4:00 E w/4:00 W
(–14 weeks) 3 × 4:00 E w/4:00 W + 15:00-20:00 E + 6:00 W
Above WO was to be last of the week and was to be either yesterday or
today.
13-12 weeks until race
Session Workout
A 5:00 E + 3:00 W + 5 × 3:00 T pace, w/2:00 W following each T run + 10
ST
Above WO is the first of the week, to be done either yesterday or today.
B If you run today, do 3 × 10:00 E w/5:00 W (take less than 5:00 W if feeling
good).
C If you train today, repeat the A workout of this week.
D 3 × 10:00 E w/5:00 W (may take less W if not that much recovery is
needed)
E (–13 weeks) 5:00 E + 5:00 W + 3 × 5:00 T w/2:00 W recoveries + 15:00 E
+ 4:00 W
(–12 weeks) 5:00 E + 5:00 W + 2 × 5:00 T w/2:00 W recoveries + 25:00-
30:00 E + 6:00 W
Day 6 WO was to be last of the week and could be either yesterday or
today.
11-10 weeks until race
Session Workout
A 10:00 E + 5:00 W + 5 ST + 5:00 W + 2 × 10:00 E w/5:00 W
Above WO is the first of the week, to be done either yesterday or today.
B If you train today, repeat the A workout of this week.
C 5:00 E + 5:00 W + 20:00 E + 5:00 W + 5:00 T + 5:00 W + 5:00 E + 5:00 W
D If you run today, do 3 × 10:00 E w/5:00 W (may do less than 5:00
recoveries if desired).
E (–11weeks) 10:00 E + 5:00 W + 5 ST + 5:00 W + 20:00 T + 5:00 W + 10 E
--- PAGE 294 ---
(–10 weeks) 10:00 E + 5:00 W + 5 ST + 5:00 W + 20:00 T + 5:00 W + 20
E
Day 6 WO was to be last of the week and could be either yesterday or
today.
9-2 weeks until race
Week First Q session Second Q session
9 Steady 90 min L run 10:00 E + 15:00 T + 5:00 E + 2 ×
(10:00 T w/2:00 W recoveries) +
5:00 T + 10:00 E
8 10:00 E + 4 × (6:00 T w/2:00 W) +
1 hr E + 2 × (8:00 T w/2:00 W
recoveries)
10:00 E + 4 × (6:00 T w/2:00 W) +
10:00 W + 3 × (6:00 T w/2:00 W)
7 1 hr 45 min at M (could be in a
shorter race, but if in a race, just
run M, not faster)
10:00 E + 3 × (10:00 T w/2:00 W)
+ 40:00 E
6 Steady 2 hr L run 10:00 E + 6 × (6:00 T w/1:00 W) +
10:00 E
5 10:00 E + 4 × (6:00 T w/1:00 W) +
60:00 E + 3 × (6:00 T w/1:00 W)
10:00 E + 4 × (10:00 T w/2:00 W)
+ 10:00 E
4 Steady 2 hr 30 min L run 10:00 E + 4 × (10:00 T w/2:00 W)
+ 10:00 E
3 Steady 2 hr 15 min at M 10:00 E + 3 × (12:00 T w/2:00 W)
+ 10:00 E
2 Steady 2 hr 15 min L run 10:00 E + 7 × (6:00 T w/1:00 W) +
10:00 E
1 week until race
Day Workout
7 90 min E
6 60 min E
5 10:00 E + 4 × (5:00 T w/2:00 W) + 10:00 E
4 30:00-45:00 E
3 30:00 E
Feel free to take any one of these final 3 days off; may be a travel day.
2 30:00 E
1 30:00 E
Marathon is tomorrow
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
--- PAGE 295 ---
2Q PROGRAM
Before starting any 2Q 18-week program, you should have at least 6 weeks
of running under your belt. All 2Q plans include two Q training sessions
each week. Try to do some running on at least 6 days each week. It is
suggested that Q1 be on Sunday, or the same day of the week on which
your coming marathon will be run. With Q1 on Sunday, then Q2 is best
located on Wednesday or Thursday. Feel free to rearrange your Q1 and Q2
sessions to fall on whichever days best suit your personal schedule, but
make an effort to always have 2 or 3 E days between Q days.
E days are to be used for recovery and easy running to accumulate your
weekly mileage goals. E days may involve one, two, or more E runs each
day, as needed. If you must, or desire to, take a day off from training now
and then, just use the remaining E days of that week to reach your weekly
mileage goal. Make a habit of adding six to eight strides to the middle or
end of at least 2 E days each week. Strides (ST) are meant to be light, quick
15- to 20-second runs, with about 45 to 60 seconds of recovery between
each. Strides are fast, controlled runs but not sprints.
If you include races during this marathon plan, schedule them in place of
your Q1 session for that week, but perform the displaced Q1 session at
midweek and drop that week’s Q2 altogether. This means a Sunday race
would start the week with the race, followed by that week’s Q1 (a few days
later), and the next week starts with its Q1, as normal. Try to rearrange
training so you get 3 E days before a race, and take 1 E day for each 3,000
to 4,000 meters of race distance (e.g., 3 E days after a 10K).
I typically suggest that weekly mileage vary from about 80 to 100
percent of peak (P) mileage, with P being the most mileage you plan to run
in any single week of this program. For example, if you pick 40 miles as
your peak weekly mileage, then, when I suggest .8P for a week, this means
you run 80 percent of 40 (32 miles) for the week. Each week’s suggested
fraction of P is listed in the second column of the program.
If you use VDOT values to determine training speeds for M, T, I, and R
paces, try to be realistic, and use a VDOT that comes from a race distance
of at least 10K. The longer and more recent the race, the better. If it has
--- PAGE 296 ---
been a while since a race, make a conservative estimate of what you think
you can race over a course of similar terrain to what you will face in
training and in your marathon. For the first 6 weeks of this program, use the
lesser of the VDOT values that is equal to a recent race and 2 VDOT units
lower than your anticipated marathon VDOT. During the second 6 weeks of
this program, increase the VDOT value by 1 unit, and for the final 6 weeks,
increase another VDOT unit for determining training intensities.
If not using VDOT units, choose a realistic goal M pace. Then, final T
pace will be 15 seconds per mile faster than goal M pace. Final I pace will
be 6 seconds per 400 meters faster than T pace. Final R pace will be 3
seconds per 200 meters faster than I pace. An example of using this method
follows: Assume estimated M race pace is 6:00 per mile (3:43/km), which
means your final T pace is 5:45/mile (about 86 sec/400 and 3:35/km). This
makes final I pace 80 sec/400 or 3:20/km, and final R pace is 74/400 and
37/200.
For the first 6 weeks, use training paces that are 10 seconds per mile (6
sec/km) slower than your goal and final paces, and for the middle 6 weeks,
bring the paces to within 4 seconds per mile (2.5 sec/km) of your goal and
final paces (which are then to be used during the final 6 weeks of the
overall 18-week program).
Table 16.3 shows programs for runners who are running from 40 miles
(64 km) per week to about 120 miles (193 km) per week. I have bolded
some quality sessions, which means if you feel overly tired or
overwhelmed, the bolded session may be eliminated and replaced by an E
day of training. The number listed before the training intensity is the
number of miles that should be completed at that intensity. For example, 3
E means 3 miles at easy pace, 4 M means 4 miles at marathon pace, and 1
T means 1 mile at threshold pace.
Table 16.3    Two Quality Sessions Marathon Training Plan for 40
to 120 Miles (64 to 193 km) per Week
Up to 40 miles (64 km) per week
Weeks
until race
Fraction
of peak Workout
Miles for Q
sessions
--- PAGE 297 ---
18 .8 Q1 = 3 E + 4 M + 1 T + 1 M + 2 E
(nonstop workout if no rest shown)
11
Q2 = 5 E + 2 T + 2 min rest + 1 E + 2
× (1 T w/1 min rest between) + 2 E
12
17 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 2 × (1 T w/1 min rests) +
30 min E + 2 × (1 T w/1 min rests) +
2 E
12
Q2 = 3 E + 6 × (2 min I w/2 min jg
between) + 4 × (1 min R w/2 min jg)
+ 2 E
9
16 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 90-110 min 11
Q2 = 5 E + 4 × (1 T w/1 min rests) +
2 E
11
15 .9 Q1 = 2 E + 5 M + 1 T + 1 M + 2 E 11
Q2 = 40 min E + 4 × (1 T w/1 min
rests) + 2 E
9
14 .9 Q1 = 2 E + 2 × (1 T w/1 min rests) +
30 min E + 2 × (1 T w/1 min rests) +
2 E
11
Q2 = 40 min E + 5 × (3 min I w/2 min
jg recoveries) + 2 E
9
13 .9 Q1= steady E run of 90-120 min 12
Q2 = 40 min E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min
rests) + 2 E
10
12 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 6 M + 1 T + 1 E 12
Q2 = 6 E + 3 T + 3 min E + 1 T + 2 E12
11 .9 Q1 = 8 E + 4 × (1 T w/1 min rests) +
1 E
13
Q2 = 6 E + 3 × (4 min I w/3 min jg) +
4 × (1 min R w/2 min jg) + 2 E
11
10 1.0 Q1 = steady E run of 120-130 min 14
Q2 = 6 E + 6 M + 2 E 14
9 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 1 T + 8 M + 2 E 15
Q2 = 4 E + 2 T + 2 min E + 2 T + 2
min E + 1 T + 2 E
11
--- PAGE 298 ---
8 .9 Q1 = 5 E + 9 M + 2 E 16
Q2 = 8 E + 5 × (3 min I w/2 min
recovery jg) + 3 × (2 min I w/1 min jg)
+ 2 E
13
7 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 130-150 min 16
Q2 = 2 E + 10 M + 1 T + 2 E 15
6 1.0 Q1 = 3 E + 12 M + 1 E 16
Q2 = 45 min E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min
rests) + 1 T + 1 E
11
5 1.0 Q1 = 2 E + 2 T + 60 min E + 2 × (1 T
w/1 min rest between) + 2 E
15
Q2 = 6 E + 5 × (3 min I w/2 min jg) +
4 × (1 min R w/2 min jg) + 2 E
12
4 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 150 min 17
Q2 = 6 E + 5 × (3 min I w/3 min jg) +
1 T + 4 E
14
3 .9 Q1 = 1 E + 8 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E 17
Q2 = 6 E + 4 × (1 T w/1 min rests) +
2 E
12
2 .9 Q1 = 1 E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
60 min E
12
Q2 = 4 E + 1 T + 2 M + 1 E + 1 T + 2
M + 1 E
12
1 — 7 days: Q1 = 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: Q2 = 2 E + 5 × (800 T w/2
min E recovery jg) + 1 E
4 days: 50 min E
3 days: 30-40 min E
2 days: 0-20 min E
1 day: 20-30 min E (tomorrow is
the race)
10
7
6
6
4
2
3
41-55 miles (66-89 km) per week
Weeks
until race
Fraction
of peak Workout
Miles for Q
sessions
--- PAGE 299 ---
18 .8 Q1 = 4 E + 8 M + 1 T + 1 E (a
nonstop workout)
14
Q2 = 8 E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
1 T + 2 E
15
17 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 3 T + 40 min E + 2 T + 1
E
13
Q2 = 6 E + 5 × (3 min I w/2 min jg
recoveries) + 6 × (1 min R w/2 min
jg) + 2 E
13
16 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 90-120 min 15
Q2 = 6 E + 2 T + 2 min E + 2 T + 2
min E + 1 T + 2 E
13
15 .9 Q1 = 2 E + 8 M + 1 E + 2 M + 2 E 15
Q2 = 40 min E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min
rests) + 2 E
13
14 .9 Q1 = 1 E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
60 min E + 1 T + 1 E
15
Q2 = 6 E + 5 × (4 min I w/3 min jg
recoveries) + 2 E
13
13 .9 Q1= steady E run of 100-120 min 16
Q2 = 40 min E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min
rests) + 2 E
13
12 1.0 Q1 = 2 E + 6 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E 16
Q2 = 6 E + 3 T + 3 min E + 2 T + 2
min E + 1 T + 2 E
14
11 .9 Q1 = 10 E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
16
Q2 = 8 E + 5 × (3 min I w/2 min jg) +
6 × (1 min R w/2 min jg) + 2 E
15
10 1.0 Q1 = steady E run of 120 min 16
Q2 = 2 E + 12 M + 2 E 16
9 1.0 Q1 = 2 E + 6 M + 1 E + 4 M + 1 T + 1
E
15
Q2 = 5 E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
1 T + 2 E
14
--- PAGE 300 ---
8 .9 Q1 = 60 min E + 8 M + 1 E 17
Q2 = 8 E + 4 × (4 min I w/3 min
recovery jg) + 3 E
14
7 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 120-150 min 17
Q2 = 2 E + 8 M + 3 × (1 T w/1 min
recovery between) + 2 E
15
6 1.0 Q1 = 2 E + 14 M + 1 E 17
Q2 = 60 min E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min
rests) + 1 T + 1 E
15
5 1.0 Q1 = 2 E + 3 T + 60 min E + 2 T + 2
E
17
Q2 = 8 E + 5 × (3 min I w/2 min E) +
4 × (1 min R w/2 min jg) + 3 E
15
4 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 150 min 17
Q2 = 6 E + 5 × (3 min I w/2 min E) +
4 E
13
3 .9 Q1 = 1 E + 8 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E 17
Q2 = 4 E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
3 × (1 T w/1 min rests) + 2 E
13
2 .9 Q1 = 1 E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min E
recoveries) + 60 min E
15
Q2 = 4 E + 1 T + 2 M + 1 E + 1 T + 2
M + 2 E
13
1 — 7 days: Q1 = 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: Q2 = 2 E + 3 × (1 T w/2
min rests) + 2 E
4 days: 50 min E
3 days: 30-40 min E
2 days: 0-20 min E
1 day: 20-30 min E (tomorrow is
the race)
10
8
7
6
5
2
3
56-70 miles (90-113 km) per week
Weeks
until race
Fraction
of peak Workout
Miles for Q
sessions
--- PAGE 301 ---
18 .8 Q1 = 1 E + 6 M + 1 E + 6 M + 2 E (a
nonstop workout)
16
Q2 = 8 E + 3 T + 3 min rest + 2 T + 2
E
15
17 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 3 T + 60 min E + 1 T + 1
E
15
Q2 = 4 E + 5 × (1 km I w/3 min jg
recoveries) + 4 × (400 R w/400 m jg)
+ 2 E
13
16 .9 Q1 = steady E run of the lesser of 16
miles (26 km) and 120 min
16
Q2 = 6 E + 3 T + 3 min E + 2 T + 2
min E + 1 T + 2 E
14
15 .9 Q1 = 2 E + 8 M + 1 E + 3 M + 2 E 16
Q2 = 40 min E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min
rests) + 2 × (1 T w/1 min rests) + 1
E
15
14 .9 Q1 = 1 E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
60 min E + 2 T + 1 E
16
Q2 = 8 E + 6 × (1 km I w/3 min jg
recoveries) + 2 E
14
13 .8 Q1= steady E run of the lesser of 17
miles (27 km) and 120 min
17
Q2 = 40 min E + 3 T + 2 min rest + 2
× (2 T w/1 min rest between) + 2 E
15
12 1.0 Q1 = 1 E + 8 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E 17
Q2 = 4 E + 3 T + 3 min E + 2 T + 2
min E + 2 T + 2 min E + 1 T + 2 E
14
11 .9 Q1 = 12 E + 3 T + 1 E 16
Q2 = 8 E + 5 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
4 × (400 R w/400 jg) + 1 E
15
10 .9 Q1 = steady E run of the lesser of 18
miles (29 km) and 130 min
18
Q2 = 2 E + 12 M + 2 E 16
9 1.0 Q1 = 3 E + 6 M + 1 E + 4 M + 1 T + 1
E
16
Q2 = 5 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
15
--- PAGE 302 ---
8 1.0 Q1 = 2 E + 2 T + 60 min E + 2 T + 2
E or 60 min E + 8 M + 1 E
17
Q2 = 8 E + 6 × (1 km I w/3 min jg) +
2 E
16
7 .9 Q1 = steady E run of the lesser of 20
miles (32 km) and 150 min
20
Q2 = 2 E + 8 M + 2 × (2 T w/2 min
recovery between) + 2 E
16
6 1.0 Q1 = 3 E + 12 M + 2 E 17
Q2 = 40 min E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min
rests) + 2 × (1 T w/1 min rests) + 1 E
17
5 .9 Q1 = 6 E + 2 T + 6 E + 2 T + 1 E17
Q2 = 8 E + 5 × (1 km I w/3 min jg) +
6 × (200 R w/200 jg) + 2 E
16
4 .9 Q1 = steady E run of the lesser of 20
miles (32 km) and 150 min
20
Q2 = 6 E + 5 × (1 km I w/3 min E) + 4
E
15
3 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 6 M + 1 E + 6 M + 2 E 17
Q2 = 2 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min E) + 2 E12
2 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
7 E
15
Q2 = 3 E + 1 T + 2 M + 1 T + 2 M + 2
E
11
1 — 7 days: Q1 = 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: Q2 = 3 E + 3 × (1 T w/2
min rests) + 2 E
4 days: 50 min E
3 days: 30-40 min E
2 days: 0-20 min E
1 day: 20-30 min E (race is
tomorrow)
13
8
8
7
5
3
3
71 to 85 miles (114-137 km) per week
Weeks
until race
Fraction
of peak Workout
Miles for Q
sessions
--- PAGE 303 ---
18 .8 Q1 = 5 E + 6 M + 1 T + 5 M + 1 E (a
nonstop workout)
18
Q2 = 8 E + 4 T + 4 min rest + 4 T + 1
E
17
17 .8 Q1 = 3 E + 3 T + 60 min E + 2 T + 2
E
18
Q2 = 6 E + 5 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
6 × (400 R w/400 m recovery jg) + 2
E
15
16 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 18 miles (29
km)
18
Q2 = 5 E + 4 T + 4 min E + 3 T + 3
min E + 2 T + 2 min E + 1 T + 2 E
17
15 .9 Q1 = 2 E + 8 M + 1 T + 2 M + 1 E + 2
M + 2 E
18
Q2 = 6 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
16
14 .9 Q1 = 2 E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
60 min E + 2 T + 2 E
18
Q2 = 8 E + 8 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
2 E or 8 E + 5 × (1 I w/4 min jg) + 2 E
17
13 .8 Q1= steady E run of 19 miles (31 km)19
Q2 = 7 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
17
12 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 8 M + 1 T + 4 M + 2 E 19
Q2 = 4 E + 3 T + 4 min E + 3 T + 3
min E + 2 T + 2 min E + 1 T + 2 E
15
11 .9 Q1 = 8 E + 3 T + 8 E 19
Q2 = 8 E + 6 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
4 × (400 R w/400 jg) + 2 E
17
10 .8 Q1 = steady E run of 20 miles (32
km)
20
Q2 = 2 E + 14 M + 2 E 18
9 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 6 M + 1 T + 5 M + 2 E18
Q2 = 5 E + 2 × (3 T w/3 min rests) +
2 T + 3 E
16
--- PAGE 304 ---
8 .9 Q1 = 1 E + 3 T + 10 E + 3 T + 1 E or
4 E + 13 M + 1 E
18
Q2 = 8 E + 8 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
2 E
17
7 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 20 miles (32
km)
20
Q2 = 2 E + 8 M + 3 T + 2 E 15
6 1.0 Q1 = 2 E + 8 M + 1 T + 4 M + 1 T + 1
M + 1 E
18
Q2 = 4 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
14
5 .9 Q1 = 2 E + 2 T + 8 E + 2 T + 2 E16
Q2 = 6 E + 5 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
4 × (400 R w/400 jg) + 2 E
14
4 .8 Q1 = steady E run of 18 miles 18
Q2 = 3 E + 3 × (1 T w/1 min jg) + 3 ×
(1 km I w/2 min jg) + 3 × (400 R
w/400 jg) + 2 E
12
3 .8 Q1 = 3 E + 6 M + 1 T + 6 M + 2 E 18
Q2 = 2 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min E) + 2 E12
2 .7 Q1 = 2 E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min E
recoveries) + 8 E
16
Q2 = 4 E + 1 T + 2 M + 1 T + 2 M + 2
E
12
1 — 7 days: Q1 = 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: Q2 = 4 E + 3 × (1 T w/2
min E recoveries) + 2 E
4 days: 50 min E
3 days: 30-40 min E
2 days: 0-20 min E
1 day: 20-30 min E (tomorrow is
the race)
13
8
9
7
5
3
3
86-100 miles (138-161 km) per week
Weeks
until race
Fraction
of peak Workout
Miles for Q
sessions
--- PAGE 305 ---
18 .8 Q1 = 5 E + 6 M + 1 T + 5 M + 1 T + 1
M + 1 E (a nonstop workout)
20
Q2 = 8 E + 4 T + 4 min rest + 4 T + 2
E
18
17 .8 Q1 = 4 E + 3 T + 60 min E + 3 T + 2
E
21
Q2 = 8 E + 5 × (1 km I w/2 min
recovery jg) + 6 × (400 R w/400 m jg)
+ 2 E
17
16 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 22 miles (35
km)
22
Q2 = 5 E + 4 T + 4 min rest + 3 T + 3
min rest + 2 T + 2 min rest + 1 T + 2
E
17
15 .9 Q1 = 2 E + 8 M + 1 T + 4 M + 1 T + 2
M + 2 E
20
Q2 = 6 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
16
14 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
60 min E + 3 T + 2 E
20
Q2 = 8 E + 8 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
2 E or 8 E + 5 × (1 I w/4 min jg) + 2 E
17
13 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 21 miles (34
km)
21
Q2 = 40 min E + 5 × (2 T w/2 min
rests) + 2 E
18
12 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 8 M + 1 T + 6 M + 1 T + 1
E
21
Q2 = 6 E + 4 T + 4 min E + 3 T + 3
min E + 2 T + 2 min E + 1 T + 2 E
18
11 1.0 Q1 = 8 E + 4 T + 10 E 22
Q2 = 8 E + 6 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
4 × (400 R w/400 jg) + 2 E
17
10 .8 Q1 = steady E run of 21 miles (34
km)
21
Q2 = 2 E + 15 M + 2 E 19
--- PAGE 306 ---
9 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 6 M + 1 T + 6 M + 1 E18
Q2 = 3 E + 4 T + 4 min rest + 3 T + 3
min rest + 3 T + 2 E
15
8 1.0 Q1 = 2 E + 4 T + 10 E + 4 T + 1 E or
5 E + 14 M + 2 E
21
Q2 = 8 E + 3 × (1 I w/4 min jg) + 3 ×
(1 km I w/2 min jg) + 2 E
16
7 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 22 miles (35
km)
22
Q2 = 2 E + 8 M + 4 T + 2 E 16
6 1.0 Q1 = 3 E + 8 M + 1 T + 4 M + 1 T + 1
M + 1 E
19
Q2 = 3 E + 4 T + 4 min E + 3 × (2 T
w/2 min rests) + 2 E
15
5 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 3 T + 8 E + 3 T + 2 E18
Q2 = 6 E + 6 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
4 × (400 R w/400 jg) + 2 E
15
4 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 20 miles (32
km)
20
Q2 = 6 E + 3 × (1 T w/1 min rests) +
3 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) + 3 × (400 R
w/400 jg) + 2 E
15
3 .8 Q1 = 4 E + 6 M + 1 T + 6 M + 2 E 19
Q2 = 2 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
12
2 .7 Q1 = 2 E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
8 E
16
Q2 = 4 E + 1 T + 2 M + 1 T + 2 M + 2
E
12
1 — 7 days: Q1 = 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: Q2 = 4 E + 3 × (1 T w/2
min rests) + 2 E
4 days: 50 min E
3 days: 30-40 min E
2 days: 0-20 min E
1 day: 20-30 min E (tomorrow is
the race)
14
9
9
7
6
3
4
101-120 miles (163-193 km) per week
--- PAGE 307 ---
Weeks
until race
Fraction
of peak Workout
Miles for Q
sessions
18 .8 Q1 = 5 E + 6 M + 1 T + 5 M + 1 T + 1
M + 2 E (a nonstop workout)
21
Q2 = 10 E + 4 T + 4 min rest + 4 T +
2 E
20
17 .8 Q1 = 4 E + 3 T + 60 min E + 3 T + 2
E
21
Q2 = 8 E + 5 × (1 km I or 3 min H w/
2 min jg) + 6 × (400 R w/ 400 m jg) +
2 E
17
16 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 23 miles (37
km)
23
Q2 = 5 E + 4 T + 4 min E + 3 T + 3
min E + 2 T + 2 min E + 1 T + 2 E
18
15 .9 Q1 = 2 E + 8 M + 1 T + 4 M + 1 T + 3
M + 2 E
21
Q2 = 8 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
18
14 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
60 min E + 3 T + 2 E
20
Q2 = 8 E + 8 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
3 E or 8 E + 5 × (1 I w/ 4 min jg) + 3
E
18
13 1.0 Q1 = steady E run of 20 miles (32
km)
20
Q2 = 8 E + 5 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
20
12 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 8 M + 1 T + 6 M + 1 T + 2
E
22
Q2 = 6 E + 4 T + 4 min rest + 3 T + 3
min rest + 2 T + 2 min rest + 1 T + 2
E
18
11 .9 Q1 = 10 E + 4 T + 8 E 22
Q2 = 8 E + 6 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
4 × (400 R w/400 jg) + 2 E
17
--- PAGE 308 ---
10 .8 Q1 = steady E run of 21 miles (34
km)
21
Q2 = 2 E + 16 M + 2 E 20
9 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 6 M + 1 T + 6 M + 2 E19
Q2 = 3 E + 4 T + 4 min E + 4 T + 4
min E + 2 T + 2 E
16
8 .9 Q1 = 6 E + 13 M + 2 E 21
Q2 = 8 E + 3 × (1,200 I w/3 min jg) +
3 × (1 km I w/3 min jg) + 2 E
17
7 1.0 Q1 = steady E run of 22 miles (35
km)
22
Q2 = 3 E + 8 M + 4 T + 2 E 17
6 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 8 M + 1 T + 4 M + 1 T + 1
M + 1 E
20
Q2 = 3 E + 4 T + 4 min rest + 2 × (3
T w/3 min jg between) + 2 E
15
5 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 4 T + 8 E + 4 T + 2 E20
Q2 = 6 E + 6 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
4 × (400 R w/400 jg) + 2 E
15
4 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 21 miles (34
km)
21
Q2 = 5 E+ 3 × (1 T w/1 min jg) + 3 ×
(1 km I w/2 min jg) + 3 × (400 R
w/400 jg) + 2 E
14
3 .8 Q1 = 4 E + 6 M + 1 T + 6 M + 1 T + 2
E
20
Q2 = 4 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min E) + 2 E14
2 .7 Q1 = 2 E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
8 E
16
Q2 = 4 E + 1 T + 2 M + 1 T + 2 M + 2
E
12
1 — 7 days: Q1 = 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: Q2 = 4 E + 3 × (1 T w/2
min rests) + 2 E
4 days: 50 min E
3 days: 30-40 min E
2 days: 0-20 min E
14
9
9
7
5
3
3
--- PAGE 309 ---
1 day: 20-30 min E (tomorrow is
the race)
More than 120 miles (193 km) per week
Weeks
until race
Fraction
of peak Workout
Miles for Q
sessions
18 .8 Q1 = 5 E + 6 M + 1 T + 5 M + 1 T + 1
M + 2 E (a nonstop workout)
21
Q2 = 10 E + 4 T + 1 E + 4 T + 2 E 21
17 .8 Q1 = 4 E + 3 T + 60 min E + 3 T + 2
E
21
Q2 = 8 E + 6 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
6 × (400 R w/400 m jg) + 2 E
17
16 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 23 miles (37
km)
23
Q2 = 5 E + 4 T + 4 min E + 3 T + 3
min E + 2 T + 2 min E + 1 T + 2 E
18
15 .9 Q1 = 2 E + 8 M + 1 T + 4 M + 1 T + 3
M + 2 E
21
Q2 = 8 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
18
14 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 2 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
60 min E + 3 T + 2 E
20
Q2 = 8 E + 8 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
3 E or 8 E + 5 × (1 I w/4 min jg) + 3 E
17
13 1.0 Q1= steady E run of 20 miles (32 km)20
Q2 = 8 E + 5 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
2 E
20
12 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 8 M + 1 T + 6 M + 1 T + 2
E
22
Q2 = 6 E + 4 T + 4 min E + 3 T + 3
min E + 2 T + 2 min E + 1 T + 2 E
19
11 .9 Q1 = 10 E + 4 T + 8 E 22
Q2 = 8 E + 8 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
4 × (400 R w/400 jg) + 2 E
18
10 .8 Q1 = steady E run of 21 miles (34
km)
21
Q2 = 2 E + 16 M + 2 E 20
--- PAGE 310 ---
9 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 6 M + 1 T + 6 M + 2 E19
Q2 = 3 E + 4 T + 4 min E + 4 T + 4
min E + 2 T + 2 E
16
8 1.0 Q1 = 6 E + 13 M + 3 E 22
Q2 = 8 E + 3 × (1 I w/4 min jg) + 3 ×
(1 km I w/2 min jg) + 2 E
17
7 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 22 miles (35
km)
22
Q2 = 4 E + 8 M + 4 T + 2 E 18
6 1.0 Q1 = 4 E + 8 M + 1 T + 4 M + 1 T + 1
M + 2 E
21
Q2 = 3 E + 4 T + 4 min E + 2 × (3 T
w/3 min rests) + 2 E
15
5 .8 Q1 = 2 E + 4 T + 8 E + 4 T + 2 E20
Q2 = 6 E + 6 × (1 km I w/2 min jg) +
4 × (400 R w/400 jg) + 2 E
15
4 .9 Q1 = steady E run of 21 miles (34
km)
21
Q2 = 5 E + 3 × (1 T w/1 min jg) + 3 ×
(1 km I w/2 min jg) + 3 × (400 R
w/400 jg) + 2 E
15
3 .7 Q1 = 4 E + 6 M + 1 T + 6 M + 1 T + 2
E
20
Q2 = 2 E + 4 × (2 T w/2 min jg) + 2 E 12
2 .7 Q1 = 2 E + 3 × (2 T w/2 min rests) +
8 E
16
Q2 = 4 E + 1 T + 2 M + 1 T + 2 M + 2
E
12
1 — 7 days: Q1 = 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: Q2 = 4 E + 3 × (1 T w/2
min rests) + 2 E
4 days: 50 min E
3 days: 30-40 min E
2 days: 30-40 min E
1 day: 20-30 min E (tomorrow is
the race)
14
9
9
7
6
5
3
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
--- PAGE 311 ---
4-WEEK CYCLE
The following training programs provide 26 weeks of training and assume
that runners who follow them have been running regularly before starting
out. If you have sufficient training, it is certainly possible to jump in less
than 26 weeks before the marathon for which you are preparing. I
encourage you to look through the full program you believe best meets your
needs in order to decide when to enter, and if you think you need a few
weeks of base running before getting started, then do so.
All 4-week cycles are 2Q plans, designed to include two Q training
sessions each week, for 3 consecutive weeks, followed by a 4th week of no
Q sessions. The non-Q week contains just E running with 6 to 8 ST added
to two of your training days.
It is suggested that Q1 be on Sunday, or the same day of the week on
which your coming marathon will be run. With Q1 on Sunday, then Q2 is
best located on Wednesday or Thursday. Feel free to rearrange your Q1 and
Q2 sessions to fall on whichever days best suit your personal schedule, but
make an effort to always have 2 or 3 E days between Q days.
E days are to be used for recovery and easy (non-Q) runs and to
accumulate your weekly mileage goals. E days may involve one, two, or
more E runs for each day, as needed. If you must, or desire to, take a day
off from training now and then, just use the remaining E days of that week
to reach your weekly mileage goal. Make a habit of adding six to eight
strides to the middle or end of at least 2 E days every week. Strides (ST) are
meant to be light, quick 15- to 20-second runs, with about 45 to 60 seconds
of recovery between each. Strides are fast, controlled runs but not sprints. If
you have a moderate hill available, feel free to run strides up the hill, but be
careful jogging back down because downhill running can sometimes be a
little stressful.
--- PAGE 312 ---
Meb Keflezighi first revealed his potential as a runner by clocking a 5:20 mile time in a seventh-
grade physical education class. He typically trained for marathons in 9-day cycles in which he would
compile 140 to 150 miles, interspersing interval workouts, tempo runs, and long runs, all while
monitoring his body and resting when needed to stay healthy.
If you include races during this marathon plan, schedule them in place of
your Q1 session for that week, but perform the displaced Q1 session at
midweek and drop that week’s Q2 altogether. This means a Sunday race
would start the week with the race, followed by that week’s Q1 (a few days
later), and the next week starts with its Q1, as normal. Try to rearrange
training so you get 3 E days before a race, and take 1 E day for each 3,000
to 4,000 meters of race distance (e.g., 3 E days after a 10K).
I typically suggest that weekly mileage vary from 80 to 100 percent of
peak (P) mileage, with P being the most mileage you plan to run in any
single week, and most often every 4th week, as indicated in this program.
For example, if you pick 60 miles as your peak weekly mileage, and I
suggest .8P for a week, this means you run 80 percent of 60 (48 miles) for
that week. Each week’s suggested fraction of P is listed in the second
column of the program.
If you use VDOT values to determine training speeds for M, T, I, and R
paces, try to be realistic, and use a VDOT that comes from a race distance
of at least 10K. The longer and more recent the race, the better. If it has
been a while since a race, make a conservative estimate of what you think
--- PAGE 313 ---
you can race over a course of similar terrain to what you will face in
training and in your marathon. For the first 8 weeks of this program, use the
lesser of the VDOT values that is equal to a recent race and 3 VDOT units
lower than your anticipated marathon VDOT. During each additional 8
weeks of this program, increase the VDOT value by 1 unit. If you run a race
or two that suggest your VDOT is greater than what you would get by
adding 1 to the previous value, feel free to use the race VDOT, particularly
if you believe the course was legitimate.
If not using VDOT units, choose a realistic goal M pace. Then, final T
pace will be 15 seconds per mile faster than goal M pace. Final I pace will
be 6 seconds per 400 meters faster than T pace. Final R pace will be 3
seconds per 200 meters faster than I pace. An example of using this method
follows: Assume estimated M race pace is 6:00 per mile (3:43/km), which
means your final T pace is 5:45/mile (about 86 sec/400 and 3:35/km). This
makes final I pace 80 sec/400 or 3:20/km, and final R pace is 74/400 and
37/200.
For the first 8 weeks, use training paces that are 10 seconds per mile
slower than your goal and final paces, and for the middle 8 weeks, bring the
paces to within 4 seconds per mile (2.5 sec/km) of your goal and final paces
(which are then to be used during the final 10 weeks of the overall 26-week
program).
Table 16.4 provides 4-week cycles for runners running from 40 miles (64
km) per week to about 120 miles (193 km) per week. Remember, if no units
of distance are indicated, the distance is miles. For example, 8 M means to
run 8 miles at M pace and 3 × 1 T means to run three 1-mile runs at T pace.
Table 16.4    4-Week Cycle Marathon Training Plan for 40 to 120
Miles (64 to 193 km) per Week
Up to 40 miles (64 km) per week
Weeks
until
race
Fraction
of peak First Q session Second Q session
26 .9 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
--- PAGE 314 ---
25 .9 L = lesser of 12 miles
(19 km) & 90 min
2 E + 2 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 3
× 3 min H (I pace) w/2 min jg +
4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 1 E
24 .8 30 min E + 6 M 1 E + 3 M + 1 E + 3 M + 1 E
23 .9 2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 1 E
22 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
21 .8 L = lesser of 13 miles
(21 km) & 90 min
2 E + 2 × 1 T w/2 min rests + 3
× 1 km I w/3 min jg + 6 × 200
R w/200 jg + 1 E
20 1.0 30 min E + 8 M 1 E + 5 M + 1 E + 4 M + 1 E
19 .9 2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
18 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
17 .8 L = lesser of 14 miles
(23 km) & 2 hr
2 E + 2 T + 2 min rest + 3 × 3
min H w/3 min jg + 8 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 1 E
16 .9 3 E + 10 M 2 E + 6 M + 1 E + 4 M + 1 E
15 .8 2 E + 2 × 1 T w/1 min
rests
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E + 2 T +
2 min rest + 1 T + 1 E
14 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
13 .9 L = lesser of 15 miles
(24 km) & 2 hr
2 E + 2 T + 2 min rest + 3 × 3
min H w/2 min jg + 8 × 200 R
w/200 jg + 1 E
12 .8 20 min E + 12 M 2 E + 6 M + 1 E + 5 M + 1 E
11 .7 2 E + 2 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 T
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E + 2
min rest + 1 T + 1 E
10 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
9 .9 L = lesser of 15 miles
(24 km) & 130 min
2 E + 2 T + 2 min rest + 2 T +
2 min rest + 3 × 3 min H w/2
min jg + 6 × 200 R w/200 jg +
1 E
8 1.0 30 min E + 12 M 3 E + 6 M + 1 E + 4 M + 1 E
7 .8 30 min E + 3 × 2 T
w/2 min rests + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
--- PAGE 315 ---
6 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
5 .9 L = lesser of 15 miles
(24 km) & 130 min
2 E + 2 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 3
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 8 × 200
R w/200 jg + 1 E
4 .9 20 min E + 12 M 3 E + 5 M + 1 E + 5 M + 1 E
3 .8 60 min E + 3 T + 2
min rest + 2 T + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
2 .7 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
1 — 7 days: 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests
4 days: 60 min E
3 days: 45 min E
2 days: 30 min E
1 day: 30 min E (tomorrow is the marathon race)
41-55 miles (66-89 km) per week
Weeks
until
race
Fraction
of peak First Q session Second Q session
26 .8 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
25 .9 L = lesser of 13 miles
(21 km) & 90 min
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 3
× 3 min H (I pace) w/2 min
recovery jg + 4 × 200 R w/200
jg + 1 E
24 .8 30 min E + 7 M 1 E + 5 M + 1 E + 2 M + 1 E
23 .9 2 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4
× 400 R w/400 jg + 1 E
22 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
21 .8 L = lesser of 14 miles
(23 km) & 90 min
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests + 3
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 4 × 200
R w/200 jg + 1 E
20 1.0 30 min E + 9 M 2 E + 5 M + 1 E + 4 M + 2 E
19 .9 2 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4
× 400 R w/400 jg + 1 E
18 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
--- PAGE 316 ---
17 .8 L = lesser of 15 miles
(24 km) & 100 min
2 E + 3 × 1 T + 3 min rest + 3
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 8 × 200
R w/200 jg + 1 E
16 .9 3 E + 10 M 2 E + 6 M + 1 E + 5 M + 1 E
15 .8 2 E + 2 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 3 T + 3 min rest + 2 T +
2 min rest + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 1
E + 2 E
14 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
13 .9 L = lesser of 16 miles
(26 km) & 2 hr
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 3
min rest + 3 × 1 km I w/3 min
jg + 4 × 400 R w/400 jg + 1 E
12 .8 3 E + 13 M 1 E + 6 M + 1 E + 5 M + 1 E +
2 M + 1 E
11 .7 2 E + 2 × 2 T w/2 min
rests
2 E + 3 T + 3 min rest + 2 T +
2 min rest + 2 × 400 R w/400
jg + 2 × 1 T w/1 min rest + 1 E
+ 4 × 200 R w/200 jg + 1 E
10 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
9 .9 L = lesser of 16 miles
(26 km) & 140 min
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 6 × 200
R w/200 jg + 1 E
8 1.0 20 min E + 14 M 1 E + 6 M + 1 E + 7 M + 1 E
7 .8 4 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 1 T + 1 E
2 E + 2 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 4 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 2 E
6 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
5 .9 L = lesser of 16 miles
(26 km) & 140 min
2 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 2
T + 3 min rest + 4 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 1 E
4 .9 10 min E + 14 M 1 E + 8 M + 1 E + 5 M + 1 E
3 .8 60 min E + 3 × 2 T
w/2 min rests + 1 T
2 E + 2 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 2
× 1 T w/1 min rests + 2 E + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
2 .7 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
1 — 7 days: 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
--- PAGE 317 ---
5 days: 3 × 1 mile T w/2 min rests
4 days: 60 min E
3 days: 45 min E
2 days: 30 min E
1 day: 30 min E (tomorrow is the marathon race)
56-70 miles (90-113 km) per week
Weeks
until
race
Fraction
of peak First Q session Second Q session
26 .8 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
25 .9 L = lesser of 14 miles
(23 km) & 100 min
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4
× 3 min H (I pace) w/2 min
recovery jg + 6 × 200 R w/200
jg + 1 E
24 .8 30 min E + 8 M 1 E + 5 M + 1 E + 3 M + 1 E
23 .9 2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 1 E
22 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
21 .8 L = lesser of 15 miles
(24 km) & 105 min
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests + 5
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 8 × 200
R w/200 jg + 1 E
20 1.0 30 min E + 10 M 2 E + 6 M + 1 E + 4 M + 2 E
19 .9 2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 T
2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 1 E + 2 × 1
T w/1 min rest + 1 E
18 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
17 .8 L = lesser of 16 miles
(26 km) & 2 hr
2 E + 3 × 1 T + 3 min rest + 5
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 8 × 200
R w/200 jg + 1 E
16 .9 4 E + 12 M 2 E + 6 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E
15 .8 2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min
rests
2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 1 E + 4 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 2 E
14 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
13 .9 L = lesser of 17 miles
(27 km) & 130 min
2 E + 2 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 5
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 4 × 400
--- PAGE 318 ---
R w/400 jg + 1 E
12 .8 M = 3 E + 14 M 1 E + 8 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E
11 .7 T = 4 E + 4 × 2 T w/2
min rests + 2 E
2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4
× 200 R w/200 jg + 4 × 400 R
w/400 jg + 1 E
10 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
9 .9 L = lesser of 18 miles
(29 km) & 140 min
2 E + 3 T + 3 min rest + 2 T +
2 min rest + 5 × 3 min H w/2
min jg + 6 × 200 R w/200 jg +
1 E
8 1.0 30 min E + 15 M 2 E + 8 M + 1 E + 6 M + 2 E
7 .8 4 E + 4 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 1 T + 1 E
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 T + 2 E
6 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
5 .9 L = lesser of 18 miles
(29 km) & 140 min
2 E + 3 T + 3 min rest + 2 T +
3 min rest + 5 × 3 min H w/2
min jg + 8 × 200 R w/200 jg +
1 E
4 .9 50 min E + 16 M 4 E + 10 M + 1 E + 6 M + 2 E
3 .8 60 min E + 4 × 3 T
w/3 min rests + 1 E
2 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/ 200 jg + 2 E
2 .7 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
1 — 7 days: 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: 3 × 1 mile T w/2 min rests
4 days: 60 min E
3 days: 45 min E
2 days: 30 min E
1 day: 30 min E (tomorrow is the marathon race)
71-85 miles (114-137 km) per week
Weeks
until
race
Fraction
of peak First Q session Second Q session
26 .9 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
25 .9 L = lesser of 15 miles
(24 km) & 100 min
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 4
× 3 min H (I pace) w/2 min
--- PAGE 319 ---
recovery jg + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
24 .8 40 min E + 8 M 3 E + 5 M + 1 E + 3 M + 3 E
23 .9 2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 T + 2 min
rest + 2 × 1 T w/1 min
rests
2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
22 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
21 .8 L = lesser of 17 miles
(27 km) & 2 hr
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests + 5
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 8 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
20 1.0 30 min E + 10 M 2 E + 6 M + 1 E + 4 M + 2 E
19 .9 2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 T + 2 × 1 T
w/1 min rest + 1 E
2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 1 E
18 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
17 .8 L = lesser of 18 miles
(29 km) & 130 min
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 5
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 6 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
16 .9 40 min E + 12 M 4 E + 6 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E
15 .8 2 E + 4 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 2 T + 2 E
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 1 T + 2 E
14 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
13 .9 L = lesser of 19 miles
(31 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 6
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 4 × 400
R w/400 jg + 2 E
12 .8 4 E + 14 M 2 E + 8 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E
11 .7 4 E + 5 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 1 E
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 T + 2 E
10 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
9 .9 L = lesser of 20 miles
(32 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/3 min rests + 2
T + 2 min rest + 6 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 1 E
8 1.0 30 min E + 16 M 2 E + 8 M + 1 E + 8 M + 1 E
7 .8 4 E + 3 × 3 T w/3 min
rests + 2 T + 1 E
2 E + 4 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 1 T + 2 E
--- PAGE 320 ---
6 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
5 .9 L = lesser of 20 miles
(32 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 6
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 8 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
4 .9 30 min E + 16 M 4 E + 8 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E
3 .8 60 min E + 3 × 3 T
w/3 min rests + 2 T +
1 E
2 E + 4 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 1 T + 2 E
2 .7 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
1 — 7 days: 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests
4 days: 60 min E
3 days: 45 min E
2 days: 30 min E
1 day: 30 min E (tomorrow is the marathon race)
86-100 miles (138-161 km) per week
Weeks
until
race
Fraction
of peak First Q session Second Q session
26 .8 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
25 .9 L = lesser of 16 miles
(26 km) & 2 hr
2 E + 2 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 5
× 3 min H (I pace) w/2 min
recovery jg + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
24 .8 40 min E + 9 M 3 E + 5 M + 1 E + 3 M + 3 E
23 .9 2 E + 2 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 × 2 T w/2
min rest + 2 × 1 T w/1
min rest + 2 E
2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 E + 2 × 2 T w/2
min jg + 2 E
22 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
21 .8 L = lesser of 18 miles
(29 km) & 130 min
2 E + 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests + 5
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 8 × 200
R w/200 jg + 1 E
20 1.0 50 min E + 11 M 2 E + 6 M + 1 E + 4 M + 2 E
19 .9 2 E + 3 × 1 T w/1 min
rests + 2 × 2 T w/2
2 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
--- PAGE 321 ---
min rest + 2 × 1 T w/1
min rest + 2 E
18 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
17 .8 L = lesser of 19 miles
(31 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 4 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 5
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 6 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
16 .9 40 min E + 13 M 4 E + 6 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E
15 .8 2 E + 4 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 2 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 2 E
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 T + 2 E
14 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
13 .9 L = lesser of 20 miles
(32 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 6
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 4 × 400
R w/400 jg + 1 E
12 .8 30 min E + 15 M 2 E + 8 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E
11 .7 4 E + 4 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 3 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 1 E
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 T + 2 E
10 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
9 .9 L = lesser of 22 miles
(35 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 2
T + 2 min rest + 6 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 4 × 400 R w/400
jg + 1 E
8 1.0 40 min E + 16 M 4 E + 8 M + 1 E + 8 M + 1 E
7 .8 4 E + 6 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 1 E
2 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 4 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 2 E
6 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
5 .9 L = lesser of 22 miles
(35 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 6
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 4 × 400
R w/400 jg + 1 E
4 .9 M = 40 min E + 16 M 4 E + 8 M + 1 E + 8 M + 1 E
3 .8 60 min E + 6 × 2 T
w/2 min rests
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 3 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 2 E
2 .7 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
1 — 7 days: 90 min E
--- PAGE 322 ---
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests
4 days: 60 min E
3 days: 45 min E
2 days: 30 min E
1 day: 30 min E (tomorrow is the marathon race)
101-120 miles (163-193 km) per week
Weeks
until
race
Fraction
of peak First Q session Second Q session
26 .8 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
25 .9 L = lesser of 17 miles
& 2 hr
2 E + 2 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 1
T + 3 min rest + 5 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 6 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
24 .8 50 min E + 10 M 3 E + 6 M + 1 E + 4 M + 3 E
23 .9 3 E + 3 T + 3 min rest
+ 3 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 3 T + 3 min rest + 2 T +
2 min rest + 1 T + 2 min rest +
8 × 200 R w/200 jg + 1 T + 2 E
22 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
21 .8 L = lesser of 18 miles
(29 km) & 130 min
2 E + 5 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 6
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 6 × 200
R w/200 jg + 3 E
20 1.0 50 min E + 12 M 3 E + 6 M + 1 E + 6 M + 3 E
19 .9 3 E + 5 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 T + 1 E
18 .9 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
17 .8 L = lesser of 20 miles
(32 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 6
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 6 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
16 .9 40 min E + 14 M 4 E + 8 M + 1 E + 6 M + 1 E
15 .8 3 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min
rests + 2 × 2 T w/2
min rests + 1 T + 2 E
3 E + 4 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 T + 2 E
14 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
13 .9 L = lesser of 21 miles
(34 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 6
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 4 × 400
--- PAGE 323 ---
R w/400 jg + 2 E
12 .8 40 min E + 15 M 4 E + 8 M + 1 E + 7 M + 1 E
11 .7 4 E + 4 × 3 T w/3 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 2 T w/1 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 T + 2 E
10 .6 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
9 .9 L = lesser of 23 miles
(37 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 4 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 6
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 8 × 200
R w/200 jg + 3 E
8 1.0 40 min E + 16 M 4 E + 10 M + 1 E + 6 M + 2 E
7 .8 4 E + 3 × 3 T w/3 min
rests + 2 × 2 T w/2
min rests + 1 E
2 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 4 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 2 E
6 .9 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
5 .9 L = lesser of 23 miles
(37 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 2
T + 3 min rest + 6 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 1 E
4 .9 40 min E + 16 M 4 E + 8 M + 1 E + 8 M + 2 E
3 .8 60 min E + 3 × 3 T
w/3 min rests
2 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 3 × 1 T w/2
min rests + 2 E
2 .7 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
1 — 7 days: 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests
4 days: 60 min E
3 days: 45 min E
2 days: 30 min E
1 day: 30 min E (tomorrow is the marathon race)
More than 120 miles (193 km) per week
Weeks
until
race
Fraction
of peak First Q session Second Q session
26 .8 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
25 .9 L = lesser of 18 miles
(29 km) & 2 hr
2 E + 3 T + 3 min rest + 2 T +
2 min rest + 1 T + 1 min rest +
--- PAGE 324 ---
5 × 3 min H w/2 min jg + 8 ×
200 R w/200 jg + 2 E
24 .8 60 min E + 10 M 4 E + 6 M + 1 E + 4 M + 3 E
23 .9 3 E + 5 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 3 E
3 E + 3 T + 3 min rest + 2 T +
2 min rest + 1 T + 2 min rest +
8 × 200 R w/200 jg + 2 T + 2 E
22 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
21 .8 L = lesser of 19 miles
(31 km) & 135 min
3 E + 6 × 1 T w/1 min rests + 6
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 8 × 200
R w/200 jg + 2 E
20 1.0 50 min E + 12 M 4 E + 6 M + 1 E + 6 M + 3 E
19 .9 3 E + 3 × 3 T w/3 min
rests + 2 T + 2 E
3 E + 4 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 1 T + 2 E
18 .9 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
17 .8 L = lesser of 21 miles
(34 m) & 2.5 hr
3 E + 3 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 6
× 3 min H w/2 min jg + 4 × 400
R w/400 jg + 2 E
16 .9 50 min E + 14 M 4 E + 8 M + 1 E + 6 M + 2 E
15 .8 3 E + 6 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 2 E
2 E + 4 × 2 T w/2 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 T + 2 E
14 1.0 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
13 .9 L = lesser of 22 miles
(35 km) & 2.5 hr
3 E + 3 T + 3 min rest + 2 × 2
T w/2 min rests + 6 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 1 E
12 .8 50 min E + 15 M 4 E + 8 M + 1 E + 7 M + 2 E
11 .7 4 E + 3 T + 3 min rest
+ 5 × 2 T w/2 min
rests + 2 E
3 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 2 × 2 T w/2
min rests + 2 E
10 .6 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
9 .9 L = lesser of 23 miles
(37 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 2
T + 2 min rest + 6 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 1 E
8 1.0 40 min E + 16 M 4 E + 10 M + 1 E + 6 M + 2 E
7 .8 4 E + 3 × 3 T w/3 min
rests + 2 × 2 T w/2
min rests + 1 E
3 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 4 × 1 T w/1
min rests + 2 E
--- PAGE 325 ---
6 .9 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
5 .9 L = lesser of 23 miles
(37 km) & 2.5 hr
2 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 2
T + 3 min rest + 6 × 3 min H
w/2 min jg + 8 × 200 R w/200
jg + 2 E
4 .9 40 min E + 16 M 4 E + 10 M + 1 E + 6 M + 2 E
3 .8 60 min E + 3 × 3 T
w/3 min rests
2 E + 2 × 3 T w/3 min rests + 8
× 200 R w/200 jg + 3 × 1 T w/2
min rests + 2 E
2 .7 No Q sessions this week; E runs all week + add 6-8 ST on
2 days
1 — 7 days: 90 min E
6 days: 60 min E
5 days: 3 × 1 T w/2 min rests
4 days: 60 min E
3 days: 45 min E
2 days: 30 min E
1 day: 30 min E (tomorrow is the marathon race)
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
5-WEEK CYCLE
Five-week cycles are repeated as many times as necessary to build up to an
important race. How much of each type of training is performed is a
function of current fitness and weekly mileage.
R sessions should total no more than the lesser of 5 percent of weekly
mileage and 5 miles (8 km) at R pace. Recovery time between fast R
running bouts should be two to three times as long as is the R-pace run
time. I sessions can total no more than the lesser of 8 percent of weekly
mileage and 10,000 meters at I pace. Recovery time between I-pace work
bouts should be equal to, or a little less than, time spent at I pace. In
combined I & R sessions, limit time at R and I paces to half that set aside
for individual R and I sessions.
T sessions should total no more than the lesser of 10 percent of weekly
mileage and 15 miles (24 km) at T pace, but consider 3 miles (4.8 km) at T
pace to be the minimum for any T session. Recovery between bouts of T-
pace running should be 1 minute for each 5 to 6 minutes of running time.
--- PAGE 326 ---
Limit total duration of M-pace running, in a single session, to not more
than the lesser of 18 miles (29 km) and 20 percent of weekly mileage if
doing more than 40 miles (64 km) per week, and not more than 30 percent
of weekly mileage if less than 40. See chapter 4 for R, I, T, and M sessions
to choose from.
With a weekend race, replace the back-to-back midweek sessions with
one relatively comfortable T session 4 days before the race. After races,
plan on 1 day of easy recovery running for each 3,000 meters of race
distance. For example, take 3 E days after a 10K, 5 E days after a 15K, 7 E
days after a half marathon, and 14 E days after a full marathon.
E is easy, conversational-pace running, and E pace is used in most L
runs and during warm-up, cool-down, and recovery runs between faster
work bouts. L runs are to be 30 percent of weekly mileage if running 40
miles (64 km) or less per week and 25 percent of weekly mileage if totaling
more than 40 miles per week. Make L runs the lesser of 150 minutes and
the amount determined by the 25 percent and 30 percent rules.
T is threshold-pace running, which is comfortably hard. You can
estimate T pace from the VDOT tables in chapter 5. Cruise intervals are
repeated runs at T pace, with short periods of rest between the T-pace runs.
I, or interval pace, is subjectively hard—a pace you could race at for 10 to
12 minutes. Get I pace from the VDOT tables.
R is repetition-pace running and is at current mile or 1,500 race pace. M
is marathon-pace running, determined by anticipated M race pace or VDOT
tables.
In general, I pace is about 6 to 8 seconds per 400 slower than R pace,
and T pace is 6 to 8 seconds per 400 slower than I pace. M pace is 12
seconds per mile slower than T for faster runners and 15 to 20 seconds per
mile slower than T for slower runners.
Strides (ST) are 15- to 20-second light, quick (or uphill) runs with 45 to
60 seconds of rest between them.
Table 16.5 provides an overall description of how to follow the training
program. In the last 3 weeks before the race, eliminate weekly strides and
run mostly on flat terrain to get the feeling of floating over the ground. In
the final 2 weeks before the race, eliminate hill training and follow the 1st
--- PAGE 327 ---
week of the training program, making the final week’s L run a 90-minute
effort. Instead of completing the R sessions, just focus on the L and T
sessions, completing the T session 4 or 5 days prior to the race.
Table 16.5    5-Week Cycle Marathon Training Plan
Week Day Workout
1 Sunday L run
Monday E + 8 ST
Tuesday E
Wednesday T session
Thursday R session
Friday E
Saturday E + 6 ST
2 Sunday M run
Monday E + 6 ST
Tuesday E
Wednesday T session
Thursday R session
Friday E
Saturday E + 8 ST
3 Sunday L run
Monday E + 8 ST
Tuesday E
Wednesday T session
Thursday I session
Friday E
Saturday E + 6 ST
--- PAGE 328 ---
4 Sunday M run
Monday E + 6 ST
Tuesday E
Wednesday T session
Thursday R session
Friday E
Saturday E + 8 ST
5 Sunday L run
Monday E + 8 ST
Tuesday E
Wednesday T session
Thursday I & R session
Friday E
Saturday E + 8 ST
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
FINAL 18-WEEK PROGRAMS
There isn’t always a specific amount of time available for training that
prepares a runner for a marathon, and certainly some people have, and may
also need, more time than others. Current state of fitness, weather, and the
date of the marathon will all affect how much time may be necessary or
available. I tend to write 18-week programs, but some runners like more
time than that, especially if they want to run special shorter races along the
way. Some runners who are in great shape may want to race a marathon
that’s only a couple of months away, and in such a case, they could jump
into the middle of a longer training schedule or even pick out weeks within
a longer schedule that look desirable to them.
--- PAGE 329 ---
The marathon record holder for U.S. women, Deena Kastor, says she gains confidence from putting
together several consecutive weeks of solid training.
Some runners preparing for a marathon are logging high mileage and
prefer not to try getting in two or three Q sessions in 1 week. Additionally,
some runners want the distances in their training program to be written in
miles, while others prefer dealing with distances written in kilometers. A
third approach is to follow a program that is written in time spent
performing different workouts.
With all this in mind, I present three 18-week programs, all of which
follow a similar approach to how the Q sessions are presented, but the first
program is written so all the training distances are done in miles, the second
--- PAGE 330 ---
program has all the training written in kilometers, and the third program has
all the training expressed in amounts of time rather than distances of
various intensities of training. It is possible to change training between a
distance-based program and a time-based program just to see which might
impose the least stress on a runner.
18-Week Program in Miles
This program is designed for the final 18 weeks leading up to a marathon. It
assumes you are putting in a fair amount of time running and feel better not
scheduling 2 Q runs each week; rather, a Q session is scheduled about every
4th or 5th day. The program assumes you are capable of handling a single
steady run of at least 2 hours and a week that totals 100 or more miles.
First, pick what you think is a reasonable maximum (peak, or P) weekly
mileage. Each week I suggest a fraction of your chosen P mileage to
achieve for that week (e.g., if you are doing 100 miles as a peak amount of
weekly mileage, .8P = 80 miles). An E day means 1 or 2 E runs or no run if
a rest day is needed (use E days to allow yourself to reach your weekly
distance goals). I pace is the speed you could race for about 2.5 to 3 miles,
or it is taken from the VDOT tables. On 2 E days each week, run six to
eight 20-second ST (about mile [R] race pace, not sprints). R pace is
current mile race pace.
On the E days, just do as much running as necessary to allow you to
achieve your weekly distance goal. If sometimes you need a rest day, then
use one of the E days for rest and get the week’s total distance in the other 6
days. If you have time for the longer training sessions only on weekends,
then move the days around a little, but try to get in all the workouts that are
written in detail.
Table 16.6 details an 18-week marathon training program in miles. The
schedule is flexible, so the workouts can be arranged to best fit any
schedule. The most important thing is to keep the quality training sessions
in the order listed, even if they are not completed on the specific day in the
table.
--- PAGE 331 ---
Table 16.6    18-Week Marathon Training Plan in Miles
Week Workout
1 16-18 mile (not more than 2.5 hr) long run (referred to as L) at easy (E)
pace
E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
10 min E + 10-12 miles at current estimated marathon (M) pace
E day
E day
2 E day (total .9P this week)
E day
10 min E + 2 × 3 miles T w/3 min rest between (T pace is 12-16 sec/mile
faster than M, or can be selected from VDOT tables) + 60 min E
E day
E day
E day
E day
3 10 min E + (4 × 2 mile T w/2 min rests) + 30 min E
E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
17-20 mile (not more than 2.5 hr) L run
E day
E day
--- PAGE 332 ---
4 30 min E + 5 × 1 km I w/3 min jg + 4 × 400 R w/400 jg + 30 min E
E day (total .9P this week)
E day
E day
E day
10 min E + 4 × (2 mile T w/2 min rests) + 40 min E
E day
5 E day (total 1.0P this week)
E day
18-20 mile L run (not more than 2.5 hr)
E day
E day
E day
10 min E + 10-12 miles M + 30 min E
6 E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
E day
20 min E + 4 × (2 mile T w/2 min rests) + 60 min E
E day
E day
7 E day (total 1.0P this week)
E day
30 min E + 12 miles M + 30 min E
E day
E day
E day
E day
--- PAGE 333 ---
8 60 min E + 6 × 1 km I w/400 jg recovery + 2 miles T + 10 min E
E day (total .9P this week)
E day
E day
E day
20-23 mile L run (not more than 2.5 hr)
E day
9 E day (total .9P this week)
E day
E day
30 min E + 14 miles M + 20 min E
E day
E day
E day
10 30 min E + 2 × (3 mile T w/3 min rests) + 2 × (2 mile T w/2 min rests) + 20
min E
E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
E day
30 min E + 6 × 1,200 I w/3 min jg + 2 miles T + 30 min E
E day
11 E day (total .9P this week)
E day
E day
20-23 mile L run (not more than 2.5 hr)
E day
E day
E day
--- PAGE 334 ---
12 10 min E + 80-90 min M
E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
E day
10 min E + 5 × (1 mile T w/1 min rests) + 60 min E
E day
13 E day (total 1.0P this week)
E day
E day
10 min E + 3 miles T + 4 × 1 km I w/400 jg + 2 miles T + 10 min E
E day
E day
E day
14 20-23 mile L run (not more than 2.5 hr)
E day (total .9P this week)
E day
E day
E day
20 min E + 6 miles M + 10 min E + 3 miles T + 10 min E
E day
15 E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
10 min E + 6 miles M + 1 mile T + 6 miles M + 2 miles T + 10 min E
E day
E day
E day
--- PAGE 335 ---
16 10 min E + 12-14 miles M + 50 min E
E day (total .7P this week)
E day
E day
E day
10 min E + 5 × (1 mile T w/1 min rests) + 60 min E
E day
17 E day (total .6P-.7P this week)
E day
E day
30 min E + 3 × (2 mile T w/2 min rests) + 20 min E
E day
E day
E day
18 90 min L
60 min E
20 min E + 3-4 × (1 mile T w/2 min rests) + 10 min E
50 min E
30 min E
30 min E or rest day (especially if a travel day)
30 min E (marathon race tomorrow)
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
18-Week Program in Kilometers
This program is designed for the final 18 weeks leading up to a marathon. It
assumes you have been running fairly seriously for some time before
starting the following specific workouts and that you are capable of
handling a single steady run of at least 2 hours and a week that totals at
least 125 kilometers. Use VDOT tables to determine proper M and T
training paces. Each E day is one or two E runs, or a day off if needed. Use
E days to achieve weekly distance goals.
--- PAGE 336 ---
This program demands a Q day of running every 4th or 5th day. If you
have time for the longer training sessions only on weekends, then move the
days around a little, but try to get in all the workouts that are written in
detail.
Pick what you think is a reasonable peak (P) weekly mileage for this 18-
week program, and for each week I suggest totaling a fraction of that P. For
example, if you think 120 km is a good peak amount for you and I suggest
.8P for a week, that means you should strive to total 96 km (.8 × 120) that
week.
Table 16.7 details an 18-week marathon training program in kilometers.
The schedule is flexible, so the workouts can be arranged to best fit any
schedule. The most important thing is to keep the quality training sessions
in the order listed, even if they are not completed on the specific day in the
table.
Table 16.7    18-Week Marathon Training Plan in Kilometers
Week Workout
1 25-30K (not more than 2.5 hr) long run (referred to as L) at easy (E)
pace
E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
10 min E + 15-18K at projected marathon (M) pace
E day
E day
2 E day (total .9P this week)
E day
10 min E + 2 × 5K T w/3 min rest between (T pace is 8-10 sec/km faster
than M) + 60 min E
E day
E day
E day
--- PAGE 337 ---
3 Possible road race today, or 10 min E + 4 × 3K T w/2 min rests + 30 min
E
E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
25-30K L run (not more than 2.5 hr)
E day
E day
4 E day (total .9P this week)
30 min E + 5 × (1 K T + 400 jg) + 30 min E
E day
E day
E day
10 min E + 4 × (3K T w/2 min rests) + 40 min E
E day
5 E day (total 1.0P this week)
E day
30K L run (not more than 2.5 hr)
E day
E day
E day
10 min E + 15K M + 30 min E
6 E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
E day
20 min E + 4 × (3K T w/2 min rests) + 60 min E
E day
E day
--- PAGE 338 ---
7 E day (total 1.0P this week)
E day
30 min E + 18K M + 30 min E
E day
E day
E day
E day
8 60 min E + 4K T + 30 min E + 3K T + 10 min E
E day (total .9P this week)
E day
E day
E day
30-35K L run (not more than 2.5 hr)
E day
9 E day (total .9P this week)
E day
E day
30 min E + 20K M + 20 min E
E day
E day
E day
10 30 min E + 4 × (3K T w/2 min rests) + 30 min E
E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
E day
10 min E + 4K T + 10 min E + 4K T + 40 min E
E day
--- PAGE 339 ---
11 E day (total .9P this week)
E day
E day
30-35K L (not more than 2.5 hr)
E day
E day
E day
12 10 min E + 20K M
E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
E day
10 min E + 5 × (2K T w/2 min rests) + 60 min E
E day
13 E day (total 1.0P this week)
E day
E day
10 min E + 4 × (3K T w/2 min rests) + 10 min E
E day
E day
E day
14 30-35K L
E day (total .9P this week)
E day
E day
E day
20 min E + 10K M + 10 min E + 4K T + 10 min E
E day
--- PAGE 340 ---
15 E day (total .8P this week)
E day
E day
10 min E + 5K T + 10 min E + 4K T + 10 min E + 3K T
E day
E day
E day
16 10 min E + 20K M + 50 min E
E day (total .7P this week)
E day
E day
E day
10 min E + 4 × (2K T w/2 min rests) + 60 min E
E day
17 E day (total .6P-.7P this week)
E day
E day
30 min E + 3 × (3K T w/2 min rests) + 20 min E
E day
E day
E day
18 90 min L
60 min E
20 min E + 3 × (2K T w/2 min rests) + 10 min E
40 min E
30 min E
30 min E or rest day (especially if a travel day)
30 min E (marathon race tomorrow)
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
--- PAGE 341 ---
Ryan Hall (right), shown here competing against the great Abdi Abdirahman, was one of the most
physically gifted runners I have been fortunate to coach. He willingly augmented that talent with
proper training.
18-Week Program in Time
Whether it is an advantage or a disadvantage for any particular runner,
running workouts in which all the training is expressed in time rather than
distance encourages the runner to learn to run by feel rather than always
knowing exactly how fast every mile or kilometer is being covered. No
doubt, being able to feel how hard or how easy you are stressing yourself
can be a big advantage in a race, especially if the terrain is undulating or it
is a windy day; in these cases, it may be difficult to rely on timed distances
to determine how hard you are stressing yourself. I encourage runners to try
different workouts based on time, even in good conditions, so they become
knowledgeable about relating how they feel with how hard they are
working.
For this 18-week program by time, the total minutes are shown for each
type of run. L is a long E run. In most T cases, break the total into repeated
runs. For example, T 40 means 40 minutes at T pace, which can be 8 × 5
min, 5 × 8 min, 4 × 10 min, and so on (with 1 or 2 min rests). TL 40-70
--- PAGE 342 ---
means 40 total minutes at T pace (maybe 4 × 10 min w/2 min rests) plus a
70-minute L (E) run.
TIR 15-10-5 means a total of 15 minutes (e.g., 3 × 5 min) at T pace (w/1
min rests) plus a total of 10 minutes at I pace (maybe 5 × 2 min H [hard]
w/equal-time recovery jg) plus a total of 5 minutes at R pace (e.g., 5 × 1
min R pace—maybe 4-5 × 400 or 8-10 × 200 w/double-time rests).
M is projected marathon pace, so MT 80-20 would be a steady 80-
minute run at M plus 20 total minutes at T (maybe 4 × 5 min w/1 min rests
or 2 × 10 min w/2 min rests). ME 80-60 would be an 80-minute run at M
followed immediately by a 60-minute E run. Trace up to 25K means try to
find a race of medium distance (15K to 25K), and switch days around if
none is available that particular weekend. If there are no races near this
time, then pick a favorite workout to do.
No warm-up is needed for E, L, or M sessions, but do a warm-up for
workouts that start with T. All days of the week not specified are E days, so
run however much is needed to achieve desired weekly mileage goals (you
may not need to run on all days). Do six to eight strides (ST) on 2 of each
week’s untimed days. T pace is 15 to 20 seconds per mile faster than M
pace, I pace is 6 seconds per 400 faster than T pace, and R pace is 6
seconds per 400 faster than I pace. Numbers refer to minutes of time
running.
Table 16.8 details an 18-week marathon training program in minutes.
The schedule is flexible, so the workouts can be arranged to best fit any
schedule. The most important thing is to keep the quality training sessions
in the order listed.
Table 16.8    18-Week Marathon Training Program in Time
Week Workout and time
1 L 120-150 min
TIR 15-10-5 min
2 EM 60-40 min
TL 40-60 min
3 TIR 20-15-6 min
--- PAGE 343 ---
4 MT 60-15 min
L 120-150 min
5 TIR 20-10-10 min
6 TL 40-70 min
Trace up to 25K
7 MT 80-15 min
8 TIR 20-10-8 min
T 20-20-10-10 min
9 T 40 min
10 TIR 20-15-10 min
L 150 min
11 MT 80-20 min
12 TIR 20-10-10 min
L 150 min
13 TIR 20-15-10 min
14 Big T 20-20-15-12-6 min
15 L 150 min
Irace 5-10K
16 ME 80-60 min
17 TL 40-80 min
T 40 min
18 L 1.5 hr E
1 hr
T 20 min
1 hr E
40 min E
30 min or rest day E
30 min E
Marathon race day
Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project.
--- PAGE 344 ---
FINAL 12-WEEK PROGRAM
This plan allows for 2 Q days each week (whichever days best fit your
schedule). All other days call for E running to allow you to accumulate your
desired weekly mileage goal. The numbers in the second column of table
16.9 indicate what fraction of your peak weekly miles to run that week.
For example, if you have decided that 110 is a great enough weekly
mileage, then .8 means 88 miles that week. So set a peak weekly mileage
that you think is reasonable for you for this season. The following training
is for sea level; at an altitude of 7,000 feet (2,130 m), keep the R pace the
same as at sea level, but M, T, and I paces will all be 4 seconds per 400 (10
sec/km, 16 sec/mile) slower than at sea level. Adjust training speeds to meet
conditions, such as adverse weather like wind or heat, or poor footing.
If no distance units are shown, assume miles (8 M = 8 miles at M pace).
If you are not using VDOT units, choose a realistic goal M pace. Then, final
T pace will be 15 seconds per mile faster than goal M pace. Final I pace
will be 6 seconds per 400 meters faster than T pace. Final R pace will be 3
seconds per 200 meters faster than I pace.
Table 16.9 details a demanding final 12-week marathon training plan
with two Q sessions per week. These Q sessions can be planned anywhere
in the week depending on schedule and weather constraints, but try to have
at least 2 E days between the Q sessions.
--- PAGE 346 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 347 ---
 
--- PAGE 348 ---
Chapter 17
Ultradistance
Try to make everything you do benefit your race
performances.
Competing in ultraraces has become more popular in recent years and to my
knowledge there has not been extensive research associated with events of
this duration. No doubt, an Ironman-distance triathlon is ultra in nature, but
it involves three types of sports, whereas ultraevents are mostly just a lot of
running (and some walking now and then).
I have not had the pleasure of coaching runners for ultraraces, but I
certainly have had the honor of coaching Magda Lewy-Boulet during her
preultra days and was able to watch this elite athlete run several of her
lifetime best performances all at the age of 39. These outstanding races
(1,500, 5,000, and marathon) all had VDOT values of about 68, which you
can look up in chapter 5. In fact, her marathon time of 2:26 was good
enough to send her to the Olympics for the United States. As a runner of
ultraraces, Magda has won major events in the United States and around the
world.
To take advantage of Magda’s vast experience, I asked her questions
about training for and racing ultraevents. The following is our question and
answer session on ultratraining.
Q: What is a typical long training run, expressed in time or distance,
when preparing for an ultraevent?
A: It depends on what distance you’re training for. If training for a 50-mile
or 100-mile (80-160 km) race, most weekly long runs will be in the 2.5-
to 4.5-hour range, with the distance covered varying by ability and also
type of terrain. Once a month or every other month, it’s good to do a
longer effort (50K or 100K), sometimes in an actual race or event.
Occasionally (once a month), I also like to do back-to-back long runs on
--- PAGE 349 ---
the weekend. In these I do 3 to 4 hours on Saturday, then come back and
do 2 to 3 hours on Sunday.
The final leg of a race is when all the training really pays off for ultradistance runners like Magda
Lewy-Boulet.
Q: How often do you go on a long run?
A: Every week unless I have a recovery week built in. Occasionally I will
run long twice a week.
Q: How fast are long runs?
A: Not fast at all. Ultrarunning is very much about spending time on your
feet being as comfortable as you can be for a very long time. It’s also
--- PAGE 350 ---
about learning (and teaching your body) how to fuel properly over hours
of exercise. Many long runs are also very hilly, especially if I am
training for a hilly race, so I’ll spend a decent amount of time practicing
efficient power hiking up steep hills.
Q: What time of day are most long runs?
A: I always prefer to do my long runs first thing in the morning, and that’s
when it best fits into my day. However, for proper training for races that
will go for 20 hours or more, it’s a good idea to do some late-evening or
night runs. Your brain behaves differently after being awake for a full
day, and it’s even good to practice how you will feel mentally at that
point. It’s also a good idea to be comfortable running in the dark with a
headlamp. Often, I will run to and from work. I tend to be emotionally
tired after a full day at work, and running when your brain is fatigued is
perfect simulation of what an athlete will experience in later stages of an
ultra.
Q: How many times do you run in your average day?
A: I usually just run once or twice per day, and I run 6 days per week. I take
a day off every week to optimize recovery. I have a really busy schedule,
so often during the week I’ll run to and from work.
Q: What is a typical amount of time spent running each week?
A: I typically spend 10 to 14 hours each week running, with almost half of
that coming on the weekends when I do double long runs.
Q: Do you do any Repetition workouts (faster 200s and 400s)?
A: Yes, I do, and I feel it’s a very important part of keeping my overall
fitness up and making me feel stronger at slower paces. It’s a nice
change to do something fast weekly. I mostly do shorter runs (200s) and
each session is 8 to 12 reps.
Q: Do you do any Interval or Threshold workouts?
A: I love T workouts, and they are a mainstay of my overall training.
Sometimes I like to do T workouts on a treadmill on an incline, so it’s a
little more specific to the type of racing I am doing.
Q: How often do you do R and T training and how much per session?
--- PAGE 351 ---
A: For R-pace workouts, I mostly do shorter 200s, and around 8 to 12 of
them once every week. For the T-pace workouts, I’ll do them once a
week, and I like to do a total of between 30 and 60 minute’s worth of
work at that pace or effort, broken up into chunks of 5 minutes, 10
minutes, or 15 minutes.
Q: Do you run shorter races?
A: Yes, I like to jump into races that are marathon distance and 50K as part
of my training preparation for longer races that are 50 miles or 100 miles
(80 or 160 km) long.
Q: What distance is considered an ultrarace?
A: Technically, anything longer than a marathon is considered an ultra. The
50K distance is the most common distance where ultrarunning begins.
Q: Do you do any particular nutritional preparation for ultraraces?
A: Yes, definitely. One of the biggest contributing factors for success in
ultraracing is your fueling plan and making sure your body stays
properly fueled and hydrated. Athletes must tailor their nutrition intake
to meet the demands of their training cycle and race, with planned,
purposeful fueling. The nutrition plan should vary depending on the total
distance (50K versus 100K for example), the terrain (maybe altitude),
and the expected weather (heat is terrible).
Q: Any special comments about nutrition related to your regular training
schedule?
A: Practicing a nutrition plan for training is key. Feeding your body the
right nutrients at the right time in sufficient amounts is key to
maximizing recovery and encouraging positive physiological
adaptations. Eating is training, and here are additional considerations:
Strategically plan your nutrient timing. Timing is key! Reduce
intake of fat, fiber, and protein near workouts, but increase their
consumption the rest of the day. Carbs are king for high-intensity or
for very prolonged exercise because your body prefers this fuel
source. If you have more than one daily training session, be sure to
top off glycogen levels in between. Recovery nutrition becomes
--- PAGE 352 ---
critical during heavy training, and getting sufficient protein for
muscle repair is essential.
Train the gut. Training with key nutrients (carbohydrate,
electrolytes, fluids) during activity will increase the gut’s absorptive
capacity of those nutrients, thereby reducing the risk of
gastrointestinal issues.
Train your event-specific nutrition plan. Leave nothing up to chance
on race day! Know what you will have before, during, and after any
race (have a plan), but also practice the plan. See what you tolerate
best. Know which forms (solid, liquid, gel) and which flavors sit
well with you. Mimicking the conditions of your event as closely as
possible gives you the greatest chance of nailing it when it really
counts.
Trail, sky, and long-distance runner extraordinaire Kilian Jornet Burgada has broken all kinds of
ultrarace records. He is spurred to train by his love of competition and quest to conquer new
landscapes.
Q: Is it common to repeat the same ultraraces over the years?
A: Yes, it is. Many ultraraces are wonderfully run and are like a little
community themselves. Many ultrarunners have a few races either in
--- PAGE 353 ---
their community or in some other special place that they like to do every
year. Often, if they can’t do a particular race, they will volunteer and
help run an aid station or help somewhere else in the race.
Q: Do you do supplemental training (for example, weights, stretching)?
A: Yes, I certainly do. I do core, balance, and stability exercises at least two
or three times each week. I also like to hike with a weight vest after long
runs. It is also important to maintain a good range of motion, and for that
I do active isolated flexibility sessions at least three times each week.
Q: What is the typical number of runners in the big ultraraces?
A: Some of the most famous races, at least in the United States, can only
accommodate 200 to 400 people due to National Park Service, U.S.
Forest Service, or Bureau of Land Management restrictions. There aren’t
many ultra trail races in the United States that have more than that
number of participants. Most of the bigger races have a lottery system
for deciding who gets to enter, but for races like Western States, it can
take years to get in. On the other hand, the Ultra-Trail du Mont-Blanc
race follows a famous hike through Italy, France, and Switzerland, and it
is widely regarded as one of the most difficult ultras in the world and one
of the largest, with more than 2,500 starters. It is one race during a
weeklong festival based in Chamonix in France.
Q: Are most ultraraces 1-day or multiple-day events?
A: Most are less than 24 hours, and most on the calendar are in the 50K to
100K range. The 100-mile (160 km) distance is also very popular, and
plenty of people will take longer than 24 hours to complete one. There
are a number of multiple-day events, and I have done a few of them
myself. The Marathon des Sables, in Morocco, is the most famous of
these and has about 1,000 participants. Personally, I love the
TransRockies Run in Colorado. It is a 6-day stage race over 120 miles
(193 km) that goes point to point over some of the most beautiful
mountainous terrain. Because of the logistics involved in setting up these
types of races, they are not as common, but they are beautiful and very
popular.
--- PAGE 354 ---
Q: What background do most ultrarunners have? What types of people
take it up?
A: Ultrarunning is not typically the starting point of a running career. Most
ultrarunners started out running cross country in high school or started
doing road races later in life. Currently, there are a lot of people who
have trained for and completed a marathon as a bucket list item and have
moved on to ultrarunning for a new challenge. The vast majority of
ultrarunners are interested in exploring the unique terrain, finishing the
challenging distance, and achieving some sort of time goal for
themselves as opposed to actually racing other people. They come in all
shapes, ages, and sizes.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 355 ---
 
--- PAGE 356 ---
Chapter 18
Triathlon
Sometimes going a little slower brings you to the
finish line faster.
The triathlon consists of three separate events: swim, bike, and run,
generally in that order. Therefore, training for a triathlon demands all-
around fitness. Because the run is the final leg of the events, a strong run
requires enough fitness to push through after already reaching a fair degree
of exhaustion.
Most triathletes have strengths and weaknesses, and training demands
significant time spent in each of the individual events. I competed in three
world championships and two Olympics in the sport of modern pentathlon,
which consists of fencing, swimming, equestrian show jumping, and a final
combined event of pistol shooting and cross country running. I spent a lot
of time trying to figure out the best way to fit the five events into my
overall training program.
During four years in modern pentathlon while also serving in the U.S.
Army, I experienced a variety of training approaches, and training while in
the Army demanded much of my time during 6 days of each week. We
practiced horseback riding for 2 hours (6:00 to 8:00 each morning),
followed by a 1-hour break for breakfast and then a couple of hours of
fencing. Next came an hour and a half of swimming, followed by lunch and
a couple of hours of rest before several hours of pistol shooting, a second
fence or ride, dinner, and about an hour of running before going to bed.
All members of the U.S. training team had to follow the same schedule,
regardless of individual strengths and weaknesses. The negative side of that
schedule was that every athlete in the program followed the same schedule,
and our run training, as the final event of the day, was difficult. It was
particularly difficult for the weaker runners to run after 2 hours of riding, 2
--- PAGE 357 ---
hours of fencing, and over an hour of swimming before each night’s
running workout.
Tim O’Donnell finished the 2019 Ironman World Championship in Kona, Hawaii, faster than any
American ever had. His success was the result of a year-round base training regimen—with workouts
totaling about 5 hours a day, one rest day per week, and a day completely off every 3 weeks—that
was ramped up in final months approaching race day.
When I completed my four years in the Army, I continued training and
competing in the modern pentathlon while attending graduate schools in a
few different states and two different countries. My studies in Sweden
included daily gymnastics and in the fall semester an orienteering
competition each Saturday, which left minimal time for training. My typical
--- PAGE 358 ---
weekly schedule was riding and shooting 1 day, 2 days of fencing, 5 days of
early-morning swimming, and running, sometimes every day, and often
during my lunch break. Despite training less, my fitness remained the same
in the ride and shoot and improved in the swim and run. This was probably
because I took more rest and recovery time between training sessions than
had been available during my Army years.
Because modern pentathlon in my days involved one event per day for
five days, it was not necessary to think about training for the various events
in a particular order, as is important in the triathlon. No doubt it is important
with triathlon training to practice the transitions from the swim to bike ride
and from biking to running so you gain an understanding of how the body
reacts to those changes in demand.
While it makes sense to schedule training sessions to practice the
demands of going from swim to bike and from bike to run, we must
remember that in triathlons, the run always starts when the athlete is
fatigued from the previous swim and bike legs. This suggests that run
training can take place before complete recovery from another event
workout; however, it’s a good idea to sometimes do your run training first
when feeling fresh and rested. The best approaches for fresh runs are at
Threshold intensity or prolonged and Easy in nature.
Triathlon training requires two types of training. First, it’s important to
practice each of the disciplines when you’re relatively fresh. But a second
consideration is that in a race you’re already fatigued when you start the
cycling and running legs, so it’s necessary to replicate those conditions in
your training and schedule a running workout right after you get off your
bike. The 6-week schedules in table 18.1 address these transitions. Note that
in the C schedule, workouts on Tuesday through Saturday mornings are in
the same discipline as the previous afternoon’s session.
Table 18.1    6-Week Triathlon Training Schedule
A schedule
Day Workout
Sunday AM: 30 min E swim
--- PAGE 359 ---
Late AM: Steady 1-1.5 hr E biking
PM: Steady 60 min E run
Monday AM: Swim I session + 30-45 min E run
PM: Supplemental training (see chapter 9)
Tuesday AM: 90-120 min steady bike at comfortable pace
PM: 60 min run, last 30 min at T pace
Wednesday Early AM: 60 min E run + 30-60 min E swim
PM: 60-90 min steady E bike
Thursday AM: 5 × 2 min H + 1 min E swim
PM: 40 min E run + 1-2 miles of 200 m R
Friday AM: 120 min steady bike + 60 min steady E run (run immediately
follows bike)
Saturday AM: Steady 2 hr E run
AM or PM: Steady 60 min T swim
B schedule
Day Workout
Sunday AM: Solid I swim (about 1 mile with H and E swims)
PM: I run (6 × 800 m H w/2 min recovery jg)
Monday AM: 60 min E swim
PM: Steady 2 hr E bike ride
Tuesday AM: Steady 90 min E bike ride
PM: Cruise I run (5 × 1 T w/1 min rests)
Wednesday AM: Steady 90 min E run
PM: I swim (5 × 200 m H w/100 m E for recovery)
Thursday AM: 60 min E swim + steady 2 hr bike (bike immediately follows swim)
Friday AM: 2 hr E bike + 2 × 20 min T runs w/3 min rests
Saturday AM: 2 hr E run
PM: 1 hr E swim (soon after the run)
C schedule
Day Workout
Sunday AM: I swim (5 × H 200 m + E 100 m)
PM: T run (5 × 1 T w/1 min rests)
Monday AM: T swim (3 × 300 m T w/50 m recoveries)
PM: 2 hr E bike ride
Tuesday AM: 2 hr E bike ride (added to yesterday’s bike = 4 hr on bike)
PM: I run (6 × 3 min H w/1 min easy jg)
Wednesday AM: 90 min steady E run
PM: I swim (5 × H 200 m + E 100 m)
Thursday AM: T swim (3 × 300 m T w/50 m recoveries)
--- PAGE 360 ---
PM: 2 hr E bike
Friday AM: 90 min E bike
PM: I run (6 × 3 min H w/1 min easy jg)
Saturday AM: 1 hr E run
PM: 1 hr E swim + 1 hr E bike (bike immediately follows swim)
The “Queen of Kona,” Paula Newby-Fraser, won 8 Ironman World Championship and 21 Ironman
Triathlon titles. She recommends that triathletes build a training program based on the realities of
their daily lives and that they efficiently and comfortably accomplish the distances they want to cover
each week in the water, on the bike, and on the road.
Look over the various training sessions and pick out particular workouts
that you can put together in a given week. Each schedule offers an
--- PAGE 361 ---
afternoon session in one of the disciplines followed the next morning by
another workout in the same discipline in order to stress the same system.
During the morning workout, the body feels as if it were finishing a single
demanding session because the overnight rest does not allow full recovery
from the previous afternoon session.
There are many approaches to training for a multievent sport like the
triathlon, and what works best for one athlete may not be the best approach
for another. I suggest trying the different approaches presented here to see
what works best for you.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 362 ---
 
Appendix: Time and Pace
Conversions
--- PAGE 366 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 367 ---
 
Glossary
aerobic—Production of energy through the use of oxygen
Athletics West—A former Nike track and field elite-athlete club in Eugene, Oregon
BLa—Blood lactate (substance produced if inadequate O2 available)
cool-down—Activity performed following a quality training session
CO2—Carbon dioxide
E—Refers to easy (low-stress) running or easy day of training
economy—Relationship between running speed and energy required
elite—High-quality athlete of Olympic caliber
Farm Team—A former Nike elite running team in Palo Alto, California
FR—Fast repetition training (about 800-meter race speed)
H—Subjective hard intensity of running
heart rate—Number of heart beats per minute associated with exercise
Hgb—Hemoglobin value measured in the blood
I—Interval intensity type of repeated bouts of running hard
interval—Type of training that alternates hard runs and recovery runs
jg—Jogging or slow running
jog—Slow running
K—Kilometers of distance
km—Expression of distance covered in kilometers
L—Long (prolonged) run
m—Expression of distance covered in meters
M—Marathon (race) pace of running
Mod—Moderately long (Mod) pace about 20 to 30 seconds per mile faster than typical E (L)
pace
mph—Miles per hour
O2 or O—Oxygen
overstress—Working beyond what is expected of a training workout
P—Peak of weekly mileage
profile—Description of the response to various types of training
Q—Quality (special amount of training stress beyond resting)
R—Repetition intensity of training (about current mile race pace)
--- PAGE 368 ---
repetition—Fairly fast R-pace running alternated with adequate recovery
RPE—Rating of perceived exertion as a mental judgment of stress
Run SMART Project—Running organization that provides training for runners
ST—Strides, which are light, short, quick R-pace runs
stress—Imposing a reaction on the body through training
supplemental—Additional activity for runners, aside from running
T—Threshold intensity of running, based on current VDOT
time—Durations of training bouts and recovery bouts in a workout
ultra—Running events of extraordinary duration or distance, longer than a marathon
VDOT—Measure of running ability based on race results
O2—Volume of oxygen consumed per minute
v
 O2max—Velocity of running associated with individual 
O2max
W—Walking rather than running
w/—With
WO—Workout (training session)
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 369 ---
 
Index
Note: The italicized f and t following page numbers refer to figures and tables, respectively.
A
ability
ability motivation categories  5-8
inherent  3-4
in laws of running  12
accelerating setbacks  25f, 26
acclimatization. See also specific conditions
altitude  101
cold climates  98-99
competitive  101, 104
hot climates  98
adaptation (physiological)
training breaks and  136-137, 137f
training response principle  20-22, 21f, 22f
adaptations, in training plan  19, 157-158, 157f
aerobic capacity. See 
 O2max
aerobic profile  35-39, 37f, 38f, 39f
age categories, in VDOT tables  87, 88t-89t, 90t-95t
alien training plan  227, 228t
altitude exposure
alternating with sea level  105, 109-110, 111
benefits of  108, 110
breathing rhythms in  34
effects on performance  100-102, 102f
emphasis in training  99-100
H-pace runs  63
maintaining speed at  105-108
marathon training and  277
racing and  108-111, 108t
running economy and  40, 40f
training considerations  103-105
weather conditions  103
anaerobic power  66
arm and leg flapping  147
--- PAGE 370 ---
asthma  31
athletes. See runners
B
balance exercises  283
base training. See easy (E) runs
beginners. See novice runners
blood lactate profile
improvements in  42-44, 43f, 44f
threshold runs and  56
training stress reactions  39, 39f
blue advanced fitness plan  129-130, 130t-131t
body weight. See weight gain
breathing, and running
at altitude  34
CO2 and  31-32
rhythms of  32-34
C
caloric intake, during training breaks  137
carbohydrate  56, 282
carbon dioxide, in breathing  31-32
cardiovascular system. See also 
 O2max
blood lactate  39, 39f, 42-44, 43f, 44f, 56
hemoglobin levels  5, 46-47
strengthening  50-51
champions (runner category)  6
circuit routine  145-147, 145f, 146f
coaches and coaching
athlete motivation  6-8
direction from  9-11
multiple coaches  9
coach frustrators (runner category)  6
cold weather  98-99, 215-216
competitive acclimatization  101, 104
core exercises  283
CO2, in breathing  31-32
cross country
end-of-season runners  179
environmental challenges  211-213
pacing in  213-215
pack running  213
race preparation and focus  215-216
season planning  217
team strategies  213, 214
--- PAGE 371 ---
time versus distance training  211-212
training phases  217-222, 219t, 220t, 221t, 222t, 223t
training summary  223
cross-training
supplemental training as  144
during training breaks  137-138
cruise intervals  57-58
crunches  145
Cruz, Joaquim  163
D
Daniels’ laws of running  11-14
Daniels’ 6-second rule  79-83
dehydration. See hydration
detraining  136-137, 137f
diminishing returns  25-26, 25f
direction, in running success  9-11
double workout days
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  188
5K and 10K training  195, 196
downhill running  116-117, 144, 195
drafting  211
dynamic flexibility work  155
E
easy (E) runs. See also long (L) runs
18-week final marathon training  275
800-meter training  167, 170, 173
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  179, 181, 184
5K and 10K training  194, 195
at altitude  103, 104, 107
cross country training  217
duration of  51-52
intensity tracking  70, 71f
pace of  52
phase I training  155
purpose and benefits of  50-51, 54
triathlon training  287
VDOT values  78, 80t, 82t
eating habits. See nutrition
E days
4-week cycle marathon training  246-247
5-week cycle marathon training  260
18-week final marathon training  263
800-meter training  166, 170
--- PAGE 372 ---
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  181, 185
5K and 10K training  196-197, 204
alien training plan  227
cross country training  219, 220, 222, 223
explained  52
2Q marathon training  234
ultradistance training  281
18-week final marathon training
kilometers  268-269, 269t-273t
miles  263-264, 264t-268t
overview  230t
time  274-275, 275t-276t
800-meter training
20-30 miles per week  167-168, 168t-169t
40 miles per week  170-171, 171t-172t
50-60 miles per week  173-174, 175t-176t
overview  163
phases of  164-166
resistance training in  163, 164
encouragement, in coaching  6, 11
endurance
altitude training and  100-101
versus speed  160-161, 161t-162t
threshold runs for  56
environment. See also altitude exposure
cross country terrain  211-213, 220, 223
temperature  97-99, 112t
wind  45, 58, 64, 211
F
facility availability  8, 152
fast repetitions (FR)
800-meter training  167, 170, 174
intensity tracking  71f, 72
1,500-meter event  177-179
1,500-meter to 2-mile training
30 miles per week  180-182, 182t-184t
45 miles per week  184-185, 186t-187t
60 miles per week  188-190, 190t-191t
phases of  179-180
15K to 30K training
alien plan  227, 228t
overview  225-226
finances, and running opportunity  8
fitness level
--- PAGE 373 ---
5K and 10K training and  195
altitude exposure and  104, 110
diminishing returns, setbacks  25-26, 25f
maintenance principle  26-27
in runner profile  47, 48f, 154
in season planning  152
training breaks and  136-137, 137f
training response principle  21-22, 21f, 22f
fitness training
blue advanced plan  129-130, 130t-131t
color system  123
gold elite plan  132-133, 133t-134t
novices and  123-124
red intermediate plan  127-128, 128t-129t
training advice  124
white starting plan  124-125, 125t-126t, 217
5K event  193
5K training
40-50 miles per week  197-198, 198t-203t
60-70 miles per week  203-204, 205t-209t
phases in  195-197
previous training and  194
run types in  193, 194
5-week cycle marathon training  230t, 259-260, 261t
flexibility, in training  12
flexibility exercises  155, 283
fluid loss, monitoring  98. See also hydration
focus
in laws of running  13
as race approach  216, 223
foot strike  30-31
4-week cycle marathon training
40 miles or less per week  249t-250t
41-55 miles per week  250t-251t
56-70 miles per week  252t-253t
71-85 miles per week  253t-254t
86-100 miles per week  254t-256t
101-120 miles per week  256t-257t
120 miles or more per week  258t-259t
overview  230t, 246-248
FR. See fast repetitions (FR)
G
gender differences
running economy  41-42
--- PAGE 374 ---
VDOT tables  84-87, 85t-87t, 88t-89t, 90t-95t
O2max  41-42
genetics  3-4. See ability
Gilbert, Jimmy  74, 76
glycogen stores  56
goal setting
in cross country training  223
goal race planning  152, 154
in laws of running  12-13
gold elite fitness plan  132-133, 133t-134t
H
hard (H) runs
800-meter training  167, 170, 174
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  188
5K and 10K training  197, 203
at altitude  63
cross country training  221
interval workouts  63-64, 64t-65t
health issues  14, 124
heart, strengthening  50-51. See also cardiovascular system
heart rate
blood lactate value and  43-44, 44f
as intensity measure  44-47
hemoglobin levels  5, 46-47
high knees  145, 145f
hills and hill training
benefits of  143-144
cross country training  219-220, 223
marathon training  58
in races  216
running intensity and  45
strides on  180-181
on treadmill  116-117, 144
hot weather  45, 98, 216
hydration
at altitude  105
drinking while running  56, 282
monitoring  98
I
illness, training and  14, 124
individual differences
coaching and  7-8
in laws of running  12
--- PAGE 375 ---
marathon training and  229
in season planning  160
triathlon training and  290
inherent ability. See ability
injuries
altitude training and  108
downhill running and  144, 195
medical advice for  138
in novices  231
prevention of  50
resistance training and  143
running mechanics and  52, 144
training and  14, 124
training breaks and  137-138
intensity. See also specific training types
adjustments for training breaks  141-142, 141t
heart-rate measures of  44-47
versus speed  45
tracking  70-72, 71f
by training type  50f
on treadmill  114, 117-119, 118t
VDOT system for  74-84, 75f, 77t-78t, 80t-83t, 84t
intermittent sea-level exposure  105, 109-110, 111
intermittent training. See interval (I) training
interval (I) training
4-week cycle marathon training  248
5-week cycle marathon training  259, 260
12-week final marathon training  277
18-week final marathon training  263, 275
800-meter training  167
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  180, 188
5K and 10K training  193, 196, 203
15K to 30K training  225-226
at altitude  103, 104, 107
cross country training  211-212, 217, 221
H-pace method  63-64, 64t-65t
intensity tracking  71f, 72
phase III training  155
purpose of  60
step-count workout  63
on treadmill  116, 118
2Q marathon training  235
VDOT values  79, 81t, 83t
O2max achievement, duration  60-63, 61f, 62f
intrinsic motivation  4-8
--- PAGE 376 ---
J
Juantorena, Alberto  163
L
lab tests, versus VDOT values  74-76
lactate threshold. See blood lactate profile
landing shock
in downhill running  117
minimizing  29-30
laws of running  11-14
learning-to-hurt advantage  104, 107, 110
leg lifts  146
Lewy-Boulet, Magda  279-284
limitations, in training  23-25
long (L) runs
18-week final marathon training  274-275
800-meter training  165, 166, 167
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  179, 180, 181, 184-185
5K and 10K training  195-196, 197, 203
at altitude  104
cross country training  217, 218, 222, 223
mileage guidelines  53-54
phase II training  155
ultradistance training  279-281
VDOT values and  78, 80t, 82t
losing, learning from  13
M
maintenance principle  26-27
Marathon des Sables  284
marathon-pace (M-pace) running
4-week cycle training program  235
5-week cycle training program  260
12-week final marathon training  277
18-week final marathon training  275
800-meter training  167
5K and 10K training  197, 203
intensity tracking  70, 71f
purpose and pace determination  54-56
2Q training program  235
VDOT novice values  83-84, 84t
VDOT values  78-79, 80t, 82t
workouts  55t
marathons
--- PAGE 377 ---
4-week cycle training  246-248, 249t-259t
5-week cycle training  259-260, 261t
12-week final training  277, 277t-278t
18-week final training (kilometers)  268-269, 269t-273t
18-week final training (miles)  263-264, 264t-268t
18-week final training (time)  274-275, 275t-276t
novice training  231, 232t-233t
temperature effects on  112t
threshold training for  58
time needed for training  262-263
training overview  229, 230t
2Q training program  234-235, 235t-246t
maximum heart rate  45-46
mental preparation  215
mile event  177-179. See also 1,500-meter to 2-mile training
miles per hour conversions  121t
miles per hour relationships  122t
mistakes, in races  13
moderately long (Mod) pace
800-meter training  167, 170, 174
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  180, 184
motivation, intrinsic  4-8
M-pace. See marathon-pace (M-pace) running
musculoskeletal system  51
N
no-shows (runner category)  6
novice runners
fitness training  123-124
marathon training  230t, 231, 232t-233t
VDOT values for  83-84, 84t
nutrition
carbohydrate conservation  56
in laws of running  13
in ultradistance training  282
O
“off” days  12
opportunity, in running success  8-9
overstress  18-20
overtraining
altitude training and  108
avoiding  7, 14, 23, 28, 70
heart-rate indicator  46
Oxygen Power (Daniels, Gilbert)  76
--- PAGE 378 ---
P
pacing. See also specific run types
1,500-meter or mile races  177-178
5K and 10K races  193
at altitude  108-109, 108t
cross country races  213-215, 223
easy runs  52
M-pace runs  54-56
as race mistake  13
6-second rule  79-83
threshold runs  56-57
time and pace conversions  121t, 291t-294t
time and pace relationships  122t
VDOT values and  78-79, 80t-83t
pack running  213
pentathlon  285-287
performance
altitude effects on  100-102, 102f
flukes in  14
improving  42-44
variability in  12
periodization. See season planning
personal limits  23-25, 24t
personal profiles  47, 48f, 154
phases, in training season
800-meter training  164-166
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  179-180
adapting lengths of  157-158, 157f
overview  153-154, 153f
workout descriptions  155-156
physical education  7, 8-9
plyometrics  195
positivity
coaching approach  10
in laws of running  12
protein  282
punishment, running as  7
purpose of workout  11, 27
push-ups  145
Q
Q sessions. See also specific events or distances
defined  158
introduction of  179
--- PAGE 379 ---
R
races
4-week cycle marathon training and  247
5-week cycle marathon training and  260
5K and 10K training and  196
after acute altitude exposure  105
after altitude training  110-111
in competitive track season  180
pacing in  13, 177-178, 193, 213-215, 223
as part of training  28, 156
preparation and focus  215-216, 223
in season planning  152, 154
2Q marathon training and  234
ultradistance training and  282
race times
at altitude  108-109, 108t
temperature effects on  112t
VDOT distance tables  77t-78t
VDOT gender tables  84-85, 85t-87t
in VDOT system development  74, 75f, 76
rating of perceived exertion (RPE)  43-44, 44f
recovery nutrition  282
red intermediate fitness plan  127-128, 128t-129t
repetition (R) training
4-week cycle marathon training  248
5-week cycle marathon training  259, 260
12-week final marathon training  277
18-week final marathon training  263
800-meter training  167, 168, 170, 171, 174
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  179, 181-182, 185, 188
5K and 10K training  193, 196, 197, 203
15K to 30K training  225
at altitude  103, 104, 107
cross country training  217, 219-220
duration and recovery time  66-67
fast repetitions  167
intensity tracking  71f, 72
marathon training  235
phase II training  155
phase IV training  156
purpose of  66
6-second rule and  79-83
ultradistance training  281
VDOT values  79, 81t, 83t
workouts  68t-69t
--- PAGE 380 ---
reruns (runner category)  231
resistance training
800-meter training  163, 164
5K and 10K training  195
benefits and guidelines  142-145
circuit routine  145-147, 145f, 146f
in phase I training  155
during training breaks  137-138
training load  144
rest and recovery. See also training breaks
in laws of running  13
as part of training  18, 124
in repetition training  67, 105, 107
resting heart rate  46
RPE (rating of perceived exertion)  43-44, 44f
runners
ability motivation categories  5-8
novices  123-124, 231
personal profiles  47, 48f, 154
reruns  231
ultrarunners  284
running. See also training; specific events or distances
basic laws of  11-14
improving  42-44
ingredients for success  3-11
as punishment  7
running economy
at altitude  40, 40f, 102, 102f
gender differences  41-42
repetition training for  66
resistance training and  143
in VDOT system development  74, 75f
O2max and  35-39, 37f, 38f, 39f
running mechanics  52, 144
Ryun, Jim  111, 163
S
school schedules, and training plans  157, 217
sea level
alternating with altitude  105, 109-110, 111
versus altitude performance  101, 102f
racing at after altitude training  110-111
weather conditions  111
season planning
adjustments in  160
--- PAGE 381 ---
for cross country  217-223, 219t, 220t, 221t, 222t, 223t
information needed  151-153
phase lengths  157-158, 157f
phase overview  153-154, 153f
sample season plan  159-161
sample weekly plan  158-159, 159f
speed versus endurance in  160-161, 161t-162t
workout descriptions  155-156
setbacks. See accelerating setbacks; training breaks
shin pain  30-31
side leg lifts  145
6-second rule  79-83
sleep  13
Snell, Peter  163
specificity principle  18
speed. See also v
 O2max
at altitude  105-108
versus endurance  160-161, 161t-162t
versus intensity  45
repetition training for  66
weather adjustments  277
squat thrusts  146, 146f
stability exercises  283
step-count workout  63
stress. See training stress
stress reduction  19-20
stress table  23-25, 24t
stride rate  29-31
strides
800-meter training  167, 174
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  180-181
on hills  180-181
in phase I training  155
in white starting plan  124
stroke volume  50
success, ingredients for
adaptations in training plan  19
direction  9-11
inherent ability  3-4
intrinsic motivation  4-8
opportunity  8-9
supplemental training. See also resistance training
5K and 10K training  195
phase I training  155
running afterwards  179
--- PAGE 382 ---
training load  144
types of  142
in ultradistance training  283
T
tapers  27, 137
team strategies, in cross country  213, 214
temperature (climate)  97-99, 112t
tempo runs  57-58
10K events and runs  193, 231
10K intensity zone  70, 71f
10K training
40-50 miles per week  197-198, 198t-203t
60-70 miles per week  203-204, 205t-209t
phases in  195-197
previous training and  194
run types in  193, 194
terrain
in cross country  211-213, 220, 223
intensity and  45
3,000-meter event  177. See also 1,500-meter to 2-mile training
threshold (T) runs
4-week cycle marathon training  248
5-week cycle marathon training  259, 260
12-week final marathon training  277
800-meter training  167, 174
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  180
5K and 10K training  193, 196, 197, 203
15K to 30K training  225, 226
at altitude  103, 104, 107
cross country training  217, 221, 222
duration of  57
intensity tracking  70, 71f
pace of  56-57
phase IV training  156
purpose of  56
triathlon training  287
2Q marathon training  235
ultradistance training  281
VDOT values  80t, 82t
workouts  57-58, 59t
time and pace conversions  121t, 291t-294t
time and pace relationships  122t
time availability  23, 47, 48f, 153
time trials, at altitude  105
--- PAGE 383 ---
training. See also fitness training; training plans; specific events, distances, or training types
at altitude  99-108
consistency in  14, 124
extreme approaches  16-17
in laws of running  12, 13, 14
nutrition in  56, 282
principles of. See training principles
temperature and  97-99
types of  49, 50f
wind and  45, 58, 64, 211
training breaks
caloric intake during  137
example of  136
in fitness training  127-128
nonplanned  137-138
overview  135
physiological reactions  136-137, 137f
planned  138-140
training load adjustments for  141-142, 141t
VDOT adjustments for  139-140, 139t, 140f
training plans. See also season planning; specific events, distances, or training types
adaptations in  19
blue advanced plan  129-130, 130t-131t
development of  27-29
gold elite plan  132-133, 133t-134t
red intermediate plan  127-128, 128t-129t
runner profiles for  47, 48f, 154
sample season plan  159-161
white starting plan  124-125, 125t-126t, 217
training principles
accelerating setbacks  26
diminishing returns  25-26
maintenance  26-27
overstress  18-20
personal limits  23-25, 24t
specificity  18
training response  20-22, 21f, 22f
training stress reactions  17
training response. See adaptation (physiological)
training stress. See also intensity
increasing  29, 144
overstress  18-19
personal limits and  23-25, 24t
physical adaptation  20-22, 21f, 22f. See also specific body systems
physical reactions  17
--- PAGE 384 ---
reducing  19-20
TransRockies Run  284
treadmill training
advantages, disadvantages  114-115
best training type for  118
hill training  116-117, 144
intensity  117-119, 118t
sharing same treadmill  114, 118
steady and intermittent running  116
time and pace conversions  121t
time and pace relationships  122t
treadmill calibration  119-121
usefulness of  113-114
triathlon training  285-290, 287t-288t
T runs. See threshold (T) runs
12-week final marathon training  230t, 277, 277t-278t
twice-a-day runs
1,500-meter to 2-mile training  188
5K and 10K training  195, 196
2-mile event  177. See also 1,500-meter to 2-mile training
2Q marathon training
40 miles or less per week  235t-237t
41-55 miles per week  237t-238t
56-70 miles per week  238t-240t
71-85 miles per week  240t-241t
86-100 miles per week  241t-243t
101-120 miles per week  243t-244t
120 miles or more per week  244t-246t
overview  230t, 234-235
2-2 breathing rhythm  32-34
U
ultradistance events  279-284
Ultra-Trail du Mont-Blanc race  284
ups and downs, in performance  12
V
variation, in performance  12
vascularization  51
VDOT system
age and gender categories  87, 88t-89t, 90t-95t
development of  74, 75f
gender and race times  84-85, 85t-87t
race distance values  77t-78t
6-second rule  79-83
--- PAGE 385 ---
term explained  73
training break adjustments  139-140, 139t, 140f
training intensities using  74-84, 80t-83t, 84t
values versus lab tests  74-76
velocity. See speed; v
 O2max
Von Ruden, Tom  19
O2max
5K and 10K races  193
altitude effects on  102, 102f
blood lactate and  42-44, 44f
gender comparisons in  41-42
in interval training  60-63, 61f, 62f
running economy and  35-39, 37f, 38f, 39f
v
 O2max (velocity at 
O2max)
altitude effects on  102, 102f
defined  38
improvement in  42-43, 44f
W
warm-ups  215-216
weather
adjusting speed for  277
at altitude versus sea level  103, 111
cold climate  98-99
hot climate  98
intensity and  45
running opportunity and  8
warm-ups and  215-216
wind  45, 58, 64, 211
weekly mileage. See specific events or distances
weekly sample plan  158-159, 159f
weight gain
during training breaks  137
weight-adjusted VDOT  140, 140f
Western States race  284
white starting fitness plan  124-125, 125t-126t, 217
wind
in cross country  211
interval training with  64
marathon training for  58
running intensity and  45
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 386 ---
 
About the Author
Jack Daniels has been called the world’s best running coach. He has more
than 55 years of experience coaching and mentoring some of world’s top
distance runners at both the collegiate and postcollegiate levels, including
Jim Ryun, Penny Werthner, Ken Martin, Jerry Lawson, Alicia Shay, Peter
--- PAGE 387 ---
Gilmore, Lisa Martin, Magdalena Lewy-Boulet, Anthony “Fam”
Famiglietti, and Janet Cherobon-Bawcom. An elite athlete himself, he won
two Olympic medals and one world championship medal in the men’s
modern pentathlon.
Daniels has decades of experience as a track and cross country coach at
institutions such as Oklahoma City University, the University of Texas,
Brevard College, and the State University of New York at Cortland. Under
his guidance, Cortland runners won eight NCAA Division III team national
championships, 30 individual national titles, and more than 130 All-
America awards. He was named NCAA Division III Women’s Cross
Country Coach of the 20th Century.
For a number of years, Daniels was the national running coach advisor
for the Leukemia/Lymphoma Society’s Team in Training program, which
involved coaching thousands of marathon runners each year. He also
enjoyed coaching members of the Nike Farm Team and the Chasquis, a
group of Peruvian marathoners.
Daniels has logged years of graduate study and research on distance
running in both the United States and Sweden. He holds a doctoral degree
in physical education and physiology from the University of Wisconsin at
Madison, and he studied exercise science at the Royal Gymnastics Central
Institute in Stockholm under renowned sport scientist Per-Olof Åstrand. He
was also an associate professor in the human movement program at A.T.
Still University in Mesa, Arizona, in addition to coaching Olympic runners.
Of all his accomplishments, Daniels is most proud of his two daughters
and being married to his wife, Nancy.
OceanofPDF.com