
--- PAGE 2 ---
ADVANCED MARATHONING
FOURTH EDITION
Pete Pfitzinger
Scott Douglas
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 3 ---
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Pfitzinger, Pete, 1957- author. | Douglas, Scott, 1964- author.
Title: Advanced marathoning / Pete Pfitzinger, Scott Douglas.
Description: Fourth edition. | Champaign, IL : Human Kinetics, 2026. | Includes bibliographical
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2025003462 (print) | LCCN 2025003463 (ebook) | ISBN 9781718237476
(paperback) | ISBN 9781718237483 (epub) | ISBN 9781718237490 (pdf)
Subjects: LCSH: Marathon running--Training.
Classification: LCC GV1065.17.T73 P45 2026 (print) | LCC GV1065.17.T73 (ebook) | DDC
796.42/52--dc23/eng/20250212
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2025003462
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2025003463
ISBN: 978-1-7182-3747-6 (print)
Copyright © 2026, 2020, 2009, 2001 by Peter D. Pfitzinger and Scott M. Douglas
Human Kinetics supports copyright. Copyright fuels scientific and artistic endeavor, encourages
authors to create new works, and promotes free speech. Thank you for buying an authorized edition
of this work and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any
part of it in any form without written permission from the publisher. You are supporting authors and
allowing Human Kinetics to continue to publish works that increase the knowledge, enhance the
performance, and improve the lives of people all over the world.
To report suspected copyright infringement of content published by Human Kinetics, contact us at
permissions@hkusa.com. To request permission to legally reuse content published by Human
Kinetics, please refer to the information at https://US.HumanKinetics.com/pages/permissions-
translations-faqs.
This publication is written and published to provide accurate and authoritative information relevant
to the subject matter presented. It is published and sold with the understanding that the author and
publisher are not engaged in rendering legal, medical, or other professional services by reason of
their authorship or publication of this work. If medical or other expert assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional person should be sought.
The web addresses cited in this text were current as of April 2025, unless otherwise noted.
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Michelle Earle; Managing Editor: Kim Kaufman; Copyeditor: Cindy
Jewkes; Indexer: Rebecca McCorkle; Permissions Manager: Laurel Mitchell; Graphic Designer:
Dawn Sills; Cover Designer: Keri Evans; Cover Design Associate: Susan Rothermel Allen;
Photograph (cover): Maddie Meyer/Getty Images; Photographs (interior): © Human Kinetics,
unless otherwise noted; Photo Asset Manager: Laura Fitch; Photo Production Coordinator: Amy
M. Rose; Photo Production Manager: Jason Allen; Senior Art Manager: Kelly Hendren;
Illustrations: © Human Kinetics; Printer: Versa Press
Human Kinetics books are available at special discounts for bulk purchase. Special editions or book
excerpts can also be created to specification. For details, contact the Special Sales Manager at Human
Kinetics.
Printed in the United States of America 10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
--- PAGE 4 ---
The paper in this book is certified under a sustainable forestry program.
Human Kinetics
1607 N. Market Street
Champaign, IL 61820
USA
United States and International
Website: US.HumanKinetics.com
Email: info@hkusa.com
Phone: 1-800-747-4457
Canada
Website: Canada.HumanKinetics.com
Email: info@hkcanada.com
Human Kinetics' authorized representative for product safety in the EU is Mare Nostrum Group B.V.,
Mauritskade 21D, 1091 GC Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Email: gpsr@mare-nostrum.co.uk
E9899
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 5 ---
To all runners willing to work hard and intelligently.
—Pete Pfitzinger and Scott Douglas
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 6 ---
CONTENTS
Foreword
Preface
Part I Training Components
  1    Elements of Training
  2    Nutrition and Hydration
  3    Balancing Training and Recovery
  4    Supplementary Training
  5    Advanced Marathoning for Masters Runners
  6    Tapering for Peak Marathon Performance
  7    Race-Day Strategy
Part II Training Programs
  8    Following the Schedules
  9    Marathon Training on Up to 55 Miles (89 km) per
Week
10    Marathon Training on 55 to 70 Miles (89-113 km)
per Week
11    Marathon Training on 70 to 85 Miles (113-137
km) per Week
12    Marathon Training on More Than 85 Miles (137
km) per Week
13    Multiple Marathoning
--- PAGE 7 ---
Appendix A: Marathon Race-Pace Chart
Appendix B: Equivalent Race Times: 10K Through Marathon
Glossary
References and Recommended Reading
Index
About the Authors
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 8 ---
I
FOREWORD
remember riding the lead vehicle at the New York City Marathon in
2017. I didn’t know what to expect viewing my first marathon—and so
up close—but as I watched the lead women wind through New York
City’s five boroughs, I began to realize how different this event was to
anything else I’d experienced in our sport.
I remember watching Shalane Flanagan pull away from the field over the
final few miles to win. I watched as she pumped her arms while taking her
last steps through Central Park while waving to the crowd. I could see the
elation as she crossed the line having just accomplished such an incredible
feat.
Similarly, in Boston in 2018, I stood drenched in the freezing rain—a
silly complaint as a spectator, I know!—when the crowd on Boylston
erupted as Des Linden crossed the finish line, arms held up wide in
celebration. Both times, I could feel the electricity in the air, see the
excitement on everyone’s faces, and hear the chatter among the crowd.
But I noticed it wasn’t just the winners who displayed such strong
emotions. If you want to be truly inspired, I highly recommend standing at a
marathon finish line. The displays of pure joy, utter exhaustion, tears,
celebration, and more can move you. The marathon has a way of testing
physical, mental, and emotional limits unlike any other distance I’ve raced.
That remains true no matter where you place, how fast you run, or whether
you had the day you dreamed of or not. (To be honest, I’ve learned more
from the days where my marathon felt like a massive flop!) It’s hard to hide
the feelings elicited from such a task.
I’ve felt awe and respect for the marathon ever since witnessing it up
close that first time. And I’ve recognized there will always be a bit of a
mystery to it. Maybe that’s why I keep finding my way back to the
marathon. As someone who loves to try to strip something apart and figure
--- PAGE 9 ---
it out, I have (somewhat begrudgingly) accepted I’ll never know it all when
it comes to this—not even close!
But the challenge is so fun. I’ve learned more about my body, its signals,
and my ability to adapt to high demands, and I’ve seen my will to endure
tested throughout the challenges the marathon presents. It has a way of
keeping me on my toes, throwing in unexpected curveballs, all the while
teaching me a bit about myself along the way. It is a journey that spans
deeper than the 26.2 miles itself.
I learned quite quickly, and somewhat harshly, that the marathon is more
than just running a bit farther—something I had originally assumed. The
marathon is not only about building physical fitness but also about
preparing my body to cover the distance itself, to go as long as I can before
I start to break down. Mentally and emotionally, I find the marathon is, at
times, both exciting and somewhat daunting. I often wake up the morning
of a workout eager to push my body. Other days, I question my sanity,
doubting and asking myself, “Am I doing enough?” or “Am I doing too
much?”
We all benefit from the perspective of a knowledgeable outsider. Having
my coach guide me has been instrumental in my progress. Advanced
Marathoning can play that role for you—a proven, steady hand pointing
you in the right direction toward meeting one of the most satisfying goals in
running.
Preparation for the event consists of a series of steps that serve a
purpose, but when compared to the distance itself, these steps feel so much
less significant. Yet when you combine these steps, they somehow come
together and allow your body to take on the ultimate challenge come race
day. The gradual steps along the way serve a purpose: to prepare the body
for the ultimate test of the marathon.
—Emily Sisson,
Two-time Olympian and U.S. record holder in the marathon
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 10 ---
W
PREFACE
Guidelines for Advanced
Marathoning
elcome to the fourth edition of Advanced Marathoning. The
positive reception to the first three editions—and the direct
feedback about them that we’re pleased to continually receive—
only strengthens our belief that there are tens of thousands of readers out
there eager to know how to conquer one of running’s most challenging
races.
The key to simply finishing a marathon isn’t a secret: Train long to go
long. But what about when you want to race a marathon? Then things aren’t
so simple.
Besides gaining enough baseline endurance to complete the distance,
now your concerns turn to matters such as how fast to do your long runs,
what types of interval sessions to do, how to plan your diet for maximum
performance, how to schedule hard workouts to allow both progress and
recovery, and so on. The best answers to these questions aren’t so obvious,
and they require a solid base of knowledge. You’ll acquire that knowledge
through this book.
If you’ve run a marathon and want to move beyond the basics, or if
you’re an accomplished runner at shorter distances planning a marathon
debut, it’s time to graduate to Advanced Marathoning. We hope you’ll agree
that this fourth edition—with expanded, updated information in every
chapter and more flexible training schedules—will become one of the most
valuable resources in your running library.
--- PAGE 11 ---
ADVANCED MARATHONING
What do we mean by advanced marathoning? Simply this: that many
runners aren’t content with saying, “I finished.” They want to run the
marathon as they do shorter races—as fast as possible. That doesn’t mean
they’re going to drop everything in their lives and do nothing but train, but
it does mean they’re committed to doing their best, taking into
consideration such factors as their age and real-world commitments. The
runners for whom we wrote this book have goals such as setting a personal
best, qualifying for Boston, or running faster than they did 10 years ago.
Competing in the marathon, as opposed to completing the distance
without regard for time, requires thorough, intelligent preparation. Being
dedicated to improving your marathon performance requires knowing such
things as how to incorporate race-pace segments into your long runs, how
far and how fast your hard sessions should be, what to eat so that you’re
able to run as fast at mile 25 as at the start, and so on. Advanced
marathoning has to be based on more than common sense and running
folklore. Advanced Marathoning, therefore, is based on the application of
sport science to marathon preparation and performance.
The training schedules in the second part of this book are based on a
simple concept: Research in exercise physiology has revealed that the
fastest marathoners have a few key attributes in common. These include an
ability to store a large amount of glycogen (the stored form of carbohydrate)
in their muscles, an ability to sustain submaximal speeds for prolonged
periods, an ability to send large amounts of oxygen to muscles and have
their muscles use that oxygen to produce energy, and excellent running
economy (the ability to run faster than others using a given amount of
oxygen). We know which of these attributes are most important for
successful marathoning, and we know what types of training best improve
these attributes. Marathon training, then, should be a matter of balancing
these types of training with adequate recovery so your body’s ability to
sustain a relatively fast pace for 26.2 miles (42.2 km) improves as your goal
race approaches.
We could, of course, simply present the training schedules found in the
latter part of this book and say, “Just do what we tell you. Trust us.” But we
--- PAGE 12 ---
think that the more you understand why you’re running a given workout,
the more motivated you’ll be to stick with your training and be better
prepared to assess your progress toward your marathon goal. For that
reason, before our training schedules are several chapters that explain the
principles of successful marathon preparation. These chapters explain what
is critical for marathon success and why. Digesting this information will
help you be a better marathoner. Let’s look at the contents of the first part of
this book.
YOUR GUIDE TO UNDERSTANDING
THE MARATHON
Chapter 1 is the longest chapter in this book. We don’t expect that everyone
will sit down and read it all at once; in fact, you could start on the training
schedule of your choice right now and not have to worry that you haven’t
looked at chapter 1. Eventually, though, you’ll want to read this chapter
carefully and understand its key concepts because it explains how we
applied sport science in constructing the training schedules.
Chapter 1 gives an in-depth examination of the physiological attributes
needed for success in the marathon. These include a high lactate threshold,
an ability to store a large amount of glycogen in your muscles and liver, a
well-developed ability to use fat as fuel, a relatively high maximal oxygen
uptake, and good running economy. (Don’t worry if any of these concepts
are unclear to you—you’ll fully understand them and their relation to
marathoning after reading chapter 1.) We look at the traits your body must
have to run a good marathon, and then we detail how to train to provide the
greatest stimulus to improve these traits.
Understanding the concepts in chapter 1 is critical. Contrary to what
some people think, training for a fast marathon doesn’t mean simply
running as many miles as possible as quickly as possible. Regardless of
how inspired you are to run your best marathon, you most likely have to
prepare for it while not neglecting other important parts of your life, such as
your job and family. Your training, then, should provide the biggest return
for the time you put into it. After you read chapter 1, you’ll know why the
targeted training the schedules call for is optimal for marathoning success.
--- PAGE 13 ---
Chapter 2 explains the crucial role that proper nutrition and hydration
play in successful marathoning. What marathoners should eat and drink is
the subject of much ill-informed discussion—perhaps almost as much
discussion as there is about training. We’ve synthesized the latest research
and best practices in our updated recommendations. After reading chapter 2,
you’ll know what marathon training and racing require in terms of fuel and
how your diet contributes to meeting your marathon goal. You’ll also
understand how dehydration can affect your performance and the strategies
you can use in training and on race day.
As we said previously, intelligent marathon preparation means more than
accumulating repeated days of hard mileage. Most of the time, you’ll make
more progress toward your goal by doing one of the key workouts
described in chapter 1, allowing your body to absorb the benefits of that
workout, and then doing another targeted session. In other words, you
should allow your body to recover after an especially long or hard run.
Chapter 3 shows how to maximize your recovery (including how far and
how fast to run in the days following a long or hard session) and how to
monitor your body’s signs to stay healthy enough to reap the benefits of
your hard work.
If you follow one of the training schedules in this book, your training
will contain all the running elements you’ll need for a fast marathon. But
there are things you can do in your nonrunning hours that can help your
overall improvement as a marathoner. In chapter 4, we detail the types of
flexibility, core strength, resistance training, and aerobic cross-training
activities that will contribute to making you the best marathoner. We also
describe a few technique drills that will help improve your running form.
Chapter 5 is for masters marathoners (i.e., age 40 and over). Although
the principles of preparing to race a marathon are the same for all runners,
aging can affect how you implement those principles. We start with a look
at why we tend to get slower with age and then show how to adapt training,
nutrition, and recovery practices to best address age-related changes. Our
recommendations might not get you a new lifetime personal best, but they
will help you be a smarter, more successful masters marathoner.
What you do in the last few weeks before your marathon can have a
profound effect on your finishing time. Because tapering your training
before the marathon is both so important and so misunderstood, we’ve
--- PAGE 14 ---
devoted a chapter to the topic of getting your final preparation right. In
chapter 6, you’ll learn how—and why—to reduce your mileage as the
marathon approaches and what workouts to do just before the race to reach
the start line with the optimal blend of being rested and ready.
The final background chapter details what to do on race day. Chapter 7
discusses race strategy with section-by-section pacing advice and presents
information on other crucial matters, such as what to eat on race day and
how to drink on the run.
THE TRAINING SCHEDULES
Chapters 9 through 13 apply the principles detailed in chapters 1 through 7
to day-by-day training schedules leading to your marathon. They’re
preceded by chapter 8, which gives in-depth direction on how to follow the
training schedule of your choice. You’ll learn not only how fast to do each
of the key types of workouts but also, based on reader feedback to earlier
editions, how to alter the schedules as warranted by injury, illness, or other
obstacles to following the schedules as written.
Chapters 9 through 12 are divided on the basis of weekly mileage. (The
training schedules in these chapters, as well as in chapter 13, also describe
each day’s workout in terms of kilometers. Choose whichever unit of
measurement you’re more comfortable with.) Chapter 9 contains the
schedules that call for the lowest weekly mileage; these peak at about 55
miles (89 km) per week. Chapter 10 contains schedules that call for about
55 to 70 miles (89-113 km) per week. Chapter 11’s schedules range from
about 65 to 85 miles (105-137 km). Chapter 12 is for the real high-mileage
folks—it starts with weeks at about 80 miles (129 km) and builds to a peak
of at least 100 miles (161 km).
We say “about” and “at least” because the training schedules include
ranges of weekly volume. These ranges are new to the fourth edition. We’ve
added them in response to reader feedback and to reflect the reality that, on
a given day, an extra mile here or two fewer kilometers there won’t derail
your training. The overall idea is to provide fairly precise guidance on what
to do each day in training but with some discretion on your part based on
how you feel that day. The schedules in chapters 9 through 12 also reflect
--- PAGE 15 ---
reader feedback and our own evolving thoughts on training. We’ve
improved the flow of hard work and recovery so that there are fewer
instances of three fairly demanding days within a four-day period. These
adjustments also make it easier to complete the schedules within the context
of a Monday-to-Friday workweek.
The weekly mileage you follow is up to you. Making that decision
should be based on your running history, your tendency toward injury
above a certain level of mileage, what else will be going on in your life in
the months before your goal race, and so on. Regardless of which schedule
you follow, it will contain the workouts that will lead to the biggest gains in
marathon-specific fitness for that level of mileage.
Chapters 9 through 12 present you with another decision to make. Each
chapter contains a 12-week and an 18-week schedule. Although we
recommend that most readers follow the 18-week schedule, we realize that
sometimes you don’t have the luxury of that much planning. The 12-week
schedules are for these situations, and while they’re more compact than is
optimal, they nonetheless contain the workouts needed to make significant
progress in a relatively short time.
The schedules are designed to be easy to read in a landscape format.
Horizontally, they show you how your mileage and training emphases
change as your marathon approaches. This helps you understand your key
training goals for a given period. Looking at the schedules vertically
enhances that understanding because you can quickly grasp the key
workouts in a given week. The schedules specify the purpose of each day’s
workout. That way you can not only determine what you’re trying to
achieve on a certain day of the week, but you can also look down to see
your most important training goals for that week.
You’ll note that the schedules specify what to do every day of the many
weeks leading up to your marathon. We realize, of course, that it’s the rare
reader whose life will so perfectly coincide with such a detailed schedule.
Again, looking at the schedules vertically and horizontally will prove
helpful because you’ll know what types of training are most important for
wherever you are on the schedule. You’ll know which workouts to
emphasize if you need to juggle a few days around.
Chapter 13 is a bit different from the other training-schedule chapters,
and it’s for marathoners who themselves are a bit different. Chapter 13 is
--- PAGE 16 ---
for multiple-marathon runners who want to run two or more marathons
within 12 weeks or less. Following such a schedule usually isn’t the way to
run your fastest marathon, but it’s not our place to say categorically that you
should never attempt such a feat. Chapter 13 acknowledges that some
runners want to tackle this challenge, and it provides schedules that will
maximize your chances of success in the second (or third, or fourth)
marathon in a given time period. Using the principles behind the other
schedules, chapter 13 provides schedules for your best possible marathon 4,
6, 8, 10, and 12 weeks after another marathon.
Now that you know what’s in this book and how to use it, let’s get going
on understanding the basics of successful marathoning.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 17 ---
PART I
Training Components
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 18 ---
T
1
ELEMENTS OF TRAINING
Description
he marathon demands respect. The physiological and psychological
demands of the marathon are extreme, so you must be intelligent and
thorough in your preparation.
The advice and training schedules in this book stem from the need for
intelligent, thorough preparation and execution. As students of the sport and
--- PAGE 19 ---
lifetime runners, we’ve integrated the hard-earned wisdom of the world’s
top coaches and marathoners with the latest running science. We know that
runners will do almost anything for a faster marathon time. What you’ll find
in these pages are the whys and hows of the most important aspects of
marathon training and racing, all presented with the recognition that
marathoning is just one of the things to which you devote your time and
energy.
While running a marathon isn’t easy, training for it should be relatively
simple. Running a marathon requires specific physiological attributes. The
task at hand is to run 26.2 miles (42.2 km) as fast as possible. The
requirements for doing so in terms of fuel use, oxygen consumption,
running biomechanics, and even psychological strengths are highly
predictable. In this chapter, we look at the physiological demands of the
marathon and how to train most effectively to meet those demands.
First, we look at the physiological demands, such as having a high
lactate threshold and the ability to store large amounts of glycogen in your
muscles and liver. Then we look at the types of training that are most
effective for improving marathon performance and explain why they are the
best. Next, we investigate how to structure your training so it progresses
logically to your desired end point. Finally, we look at the importance of
using shorter races as tune-ups for the marathon.
It’s important to read this chapter carefully. After doing so, you’ll see the
logic underpinning effective marathon training and will better understand
which types of training to emphasize and why. We’ve often heard from
Advanced Marathoning readers that they felt much more invested in their
training once they understood the purpose of each day’s run.
MARATHON PHYSIOLOGY
Successful marathoners have many factors in common. Most of these
factors are determined by both genetics and training. Genetics determines
the range within which you can improve; training determines where your
current abilities fall within that range. In this section, we’ll consider the
physiological variables necessary for marathon success.
Successful marathoners have the following physiological attributes.
--- PAGE 20 ---
High proportion of slow-twitch muscle fibers. This trait is primarily
genetically determined and influences most of the other
physiological characteristics listed here.
High lactate threshold. This is the ability to produce energy at a fast
rate aerobically without accumulating high levels of lactate in your
muscles and blood.
High glycogen storage and well-developed fat utilization. These
traits enable you to store enough glycogen in your muscles and liver
to run hard for 26.2 miles (42.2 km) while enabling your muscles to
rely more on fat for fuel.
Excellent running economy. This is your muscles’ ability to use
oxygen economically when running at marathon pace.
High maximal oxygen uptake (V O2max). This is your body’s ability
to transport large amounts of oxygen to your muscles and your
muscles’ ability to extract and use oxygen to produce energy.
Quick recovery. This is the ability to recover from training quickly.
Remember, no one factor makes a successful marathoner. U.S. record
holder and two-time Olympian Emily Sisson is a pure distance runner
whose half marathon and marathon bests are far superior to her times at
shorter distances. Contrast her with someone like Sifan Hassan, the 2024
Olympic champion and one of the fastest female marathoners in history.
Even if she had never run a marathon, Hassan would be remembered as one
of the greatest distance runners of her time thanks to a track career that
includes Olympic and world medals at distances as short as 1,500 meters.
It’s the combination of several physiological factors in conjunction with
biomechanical variables and psychological strength that determines
marathoning success. Let’s look more closely at each of the main
physiological factors.
High Proportion of Slow-Twitch Muscle
Fibers
Your hundreds of thousands of muscle fibers can be divided into three
primary categories—slow-twitch, fast-twitch A, and fast-twitch X. The
higher the percentage of slow-twitch fibers in your muscles, the greater
--- PAGE 21 ---
your likelihood of marathon success. Slow-twitch muscle fibers are
naturally adapted to endurance exercise. They resist fatigue and have a high
aerobic capacity, a high mitochondrial and capillary density, and other
characteristics that make them ideal for marathon running.
The proportion of slow-twitch fibers in your muscles is primarily
genetically determined but increases moderately with training. With
endurance training, your fast-twitch muscle fibers—especially the fast-
twitch A fibers—gain more of the characteristics of slow-twitch fibers.
These adaptations allow your fast-twitch fibers to become better at
producing energy aerobically. In addition, there is evidence that the
proportion of slow-twitch fibers may increase over years of endurance
training.
A muscle biopsy is the most accurate method of determining your
proportion of slow-twitch muscle fibers. In a biopsy, a small amount of
tissue is cut out of your muscle and analyzed. Though it is interesting (and
painful), this procedure is pointless—once you know your fiber-type
distribution, that knowledge will not change how you prepare for the
marathon.
High Lactate Threshold
A high lactate threshold (LT) may be the most important physiological
variable for endurance athletes. Your running speed at your LT is your LT
pace, which most directly determines your running performance limit in any
event lasting more than 30 minutes. Your marathon race pace is limited by
the buildup of hydrogen ions in your muscles and blood, which is
associated with accumulation of lactate. A close relationship exists between
your LT and marathon performance because LT reflects the highest rate at
which your muscles can sustain aerobic energy production. Successful
marathoners typically race at a speed very close to their LT pace.
The average runner’s LT occurs at about 75 to 80 percent of their
V O2max. Successful marathoners generally have LTs of over 80 percent of
V O2max; elite marathoners tend to have LTs of about 90 percent of
V O2max. This means that elite marathoners can use a larger proportion of
their maximal aerobic capacity before lactate accumulates in their muscles
and blood.
--- PAGE 22 ---
Lactate is produced by your muscles and is used by your muscles, heart,
liver, and kidneys. The lactate concentration in your blood represents a
balance between lactate production and consumption. Even at rest, you
produce a small amount of lactate. If your blood lactate were measured
right now, you would have a lactate concentration of about 1 millimole per
liter. As you increase your effort from resting to walking to easy running,
your rates of lactate production and consumption increase, and your blood
lactate concentration stays relatively constant. When you run harder than
your LT, however, your lactate concentration rises because the rate of
lactate clearance can no longer keep up with lactate production.
When you accumulate a high level of lactate, the hydrogen ions
associated with lactate inhibit the enzymes used to produce energy and may
interfere with the uptake of calcium, thereby reducing the muscles’ ability
to contract. In other words, you can’t produce energy as quickly, so you’re
forced to slow. This explains why well-trained marathoners run the
marathon at an intensity just below LT.
With the correct training, adaptations occur inside your muscle fibers
that allow you to run at a higher intensity without building high levels of
lactate and the associated hydrogen ions in your muscles and blood. The
most important of these adaptations are increased number and size of
mitochondria, increased aerobic enzyme activity, and increased
capillarization in your muscle fibers. These adaptations all improve your
ability to produce energy using oxygen.
Increased Number and Size of Mitochondria
Mitochondria are the only part of your muscle fibers in which energy can be
produced aerobically. Think of them as aerobic energy factories in your
muscle fibers. By fully utilizing your ability to produce energy without
accumulating high levels of lactate, LT training increases the size of your
mitochondria (i.e., makes bigger factories) and the number of mitochondria
(i.e., makes more factories) in your muscle fibers. With more mitochondria,
you can produce more energy aerobically and maintain a faster pace. This is
a relevant adaptation for marathoners because more than 99 percent of the
energy needed for running a marathon is produced aerobically.
--- PAGE 23 ---
Increased Aerobic Enzyme Activity
Enzymes in your mitochondria speed up aerobic energy production (i.e.,
increase the rate of production in your aerobic energy factories). LT training
increases aerobic enzyme activity; this adaptation improves the efficiency
of your mitochondria. The more aerobic enzyme activity in your
mitochondria, the faster you are able to produce energy aerobically.
Increased Capillarization of Muscle Fibers
Oxygen is necessary to produce energy aerobically. Your heart pumps
oxygen-rich blood to your muscles through a remarkable system of blood
vessels. Capillaries are the smallest blood vessels, and typically several
border each muscle fiber. With marathon training, you increase the number
of capillaries per muscle fiber, which allows oxygen to be more efficiently
delivered where it’s needed. Capillaries also deliver fuel to muscle fibers
and remove waste products such as carbon dioxide. An efficient delivery
and removal system provides a constant supply of oxygen and fuel and
prevents waste products from accumulating in your muscles as quickly. By
providing oxygen to individual muscle fibers, increased capillary density
allows your rate of aerobic energy production to increase.
High Glycogen Storage and Well-Developed
Fat Utilization
Glycogen is the form of carbohydrate stored in the body, and carbohydrates
are the primary fuel used when racing a marathon. Two ways to ensure that
glycogen stores last throughout the marathon are to train your body to store
a large amount of glycogen and to train your body to conserve glycogen at
marathon pace.
A large supply of glycogen in your muscles and liver at the start of the
marathon enables you to work at a high rate throughout the race without
becoming carbohydrate depleted. During the marathon, you use a
combination of carbohydrates and fat for fuel. When you run low on
glycogen, you rely more on fat, which forces you to slow because fat
metabolism uses oxygen less efficiently. With the correct training, your
muscles and liver adapt to store more glycogen. By purposefully running
--- PAGE 24 ---
very low on glycogen toward the end of certain workouts, you can provide
a stimulus for your body to adapt by storing more glycogen in the future.
(See chapter 2 for more on the train-low/race-high approach.)
Because your body can store only a limited supply of glycogen, it’s an
advantage to be able to use as much fat as possible at marathon race pace.
Successful marathoners have developed their ability to use fat, which spares
their glycogen stores and ensures that they make it to the finish line without
becoming glycogen depleted. When you train your muscles to rely more on
fat at marathon race pace, your glycogen stores last longer. In the marathon,
that means “the wall” moves closer and closer to the finish line and
eventually disappears, especially when you take in the right amount of
carbohydrates during the race. (The concept of the wall is really a reflection
of improper marathon preparation, pacing, and carbohydrate intake before
and during the marathon.) Later in this chapter, we’ll look at how to train to
improve glycogen storage and fat utilization. In chapter 2, we’ll examine
how your diet affects these adaptations and your performance.
Excellent Running Economy
Your running economy determines how fast you can run using a given
amount of oxygen. If you can run faster than another athlete while using the
same amount of oxygen, you’re more economical.
Running economy can also be viewed as how much oxygen is required
to run at a given speed. If you use less oxygen while running at the same
speed as another runner, you’re more economical. If you know how much
oxygen a runner uses at LT pace, as well as that athlete’s running economy,
you can generally predict marathon performance fairly accurately.
Your running economy varies at different running speeds and gets worse
with fatigue. Therefore, what matters for marathon performance is your
running economy at marathon race pace and reducing the decline in
economy as the race progresses.
Running economy varies widely among runners. While testing elite
runners in a laboratory, Pete has found differences of more than 20 percent
in running economy among athletes. Obviously, a large advantage exists in
being able to use oxygen as economically as possible during the marathon.
--- PAGE 25 ---
For example, say two athletes with identical LT values of 54 mL/kg/min
are racing at a pace of 6:00 per mile (per 1.6 km). Although it seems that
they should be working equally hard, this often isn’t the case. If Stacey has
an oxygen requirement of 51 mL/kg/min at that pace and Christine requires
57 mL/kg/min, Stacey will be comfortably below LT and should be able to
maintain 6:00 pace. Christine will steadily accumulate lactate and hydrogen
ions and will not be able to maintain that pace for long. Stacey has a faster
pace at LT because she uses oxygen more economically to produce energy.
The primary determinants of running economy appear to be the ratio of
slow-twitch to fast-twitch fibers in your muscles, the combined effect of
your biomechanics, and your training history. The proportion of slow-twitch
muscle fibers is important because they have more mitochondria and use
oxygen more efficiently (Barnes and Kilding, 2015a). One reason that
successful marathoners tend to be more economical than slower
marathoners is because they generally have more slow-twitch muscle fibers.
Experienced runners with more years of training and more lifetime miles
also tend to have better running economy than novice runners, likely due to
adaptations that gradually allow fast-twitch muscle fibers to have more of
the characteristics of slow-twitch fibers, as well as more efficient muscle
fiber recruitment.
Running economy is also related to the interaction of many
biomechanical variables, but no single aspect of biomechanics has been
shown to have a large impact on economy. One of the problems in trying to
improve biomechanics is that it’s impossible to change one biomechanical
variable without affecting others. Biomechanical factors that may improve
running economy include optimizing both your stride length and your
vertical motion relative to your stride length and improving the ability of
your muscles and tendons to store energy when you land and return energy
into your next stride.
High Maximal Oxygen Uptake (V O2max)
Successful marathoners have high V O2max values. This means they’re able
to transport large amounts of oxygen to their muscles, and their muscles are
able to extract and use a large amount of oxygen to produce energy
aerobically.
--- PAGE 26 ---
As you would expect, runners generally have higher V O2max values than
sedentary people, and better runners generally have higher values than their
slower counterparts. Although successful marathoners tend to have high
V O2max values, they typically aren’t as high as the V O2max values found in
elite 5,000-meter runners; this measure is relatively more associated with
5,000-meter performance. Women’s V O2max values tend to be about 10 to
15 percent lower than those for men because women have higher essential
body fat stores, lower hemoglobin levels, and lower cardiac output than
men. (Cardiac output is the combination of maximal heart rate and the
maximal amount of blood your heart can pump with each beat.)
The primary factors in increasing V O2max appear to be related to
improvements in the ability to transport oxygen to your muscles. This
ability is related to four factors: your maximal heart rate, the maximal
amount of blood your heart can pump with each beat, the hemoglobin
content of your blood, and the proportion of your blood that is transported
to your working muscles. We’ll discuss hemoglobin in chapter 2. Your body
automatically regulates the proportion of your blood transported to working
muscles. That leaves maximal heart rate and the maximal amount of blood
your heart can pump with each beat.
Your maximal heart rate is determined genetically. In other words, it
doesn’t increase with training. Successful marathoners don’t have
particularly high maximal heart rates, so it isn’t a factor in determining
success.
The maximal amount of blood your heart can pump with each beat is
called stroke volume. If the left ventricle of your heart is large, it can hold a
large amount of blood. Blood volume increases with training, resulting in
more blood being available to fill the left ventricle. If your left ventricle is
strong, it can contract fully so that not much blood is left at the end of each
contraction. Filling the left ventricle with a large amount of blood and
pumping a large proportion of that blood with each contraction result in a
large stroke volume. Stroke volume increases with the correct types of
training. In fact, increased stroke volume is the main training adaptation
that increases V O2max.
--- PAGE 27 ---
Quick Recovery
Successful marathoners are able to recover quickly from training. This
allows them to handle a larger training volume and a higher frequency of
hard training sessions than those who recover more slowly. The ability to
recover quickly is related to genetics, the structure of your training plan,
your age, lifestyle factors such as diet and sleep, and your training history.
(The 30th 20-miler of your life will probably take less out of you than your
first one.)
Runners vary in how many workouts they can tolerate in a given time.
Recovery runs and easy aerobic cross-training are important elements of
your training, but they must be handled carefully. If you do your recovery
runs or cross-training too hard, you run the risk of overtraining and
reducing the quality of your hard training sessions. This is a common
mistake among distance runners, particularly marathoners—many runners
don’t differentiate between everyday training runs (what we call “general
aerobic runs” in the training schedules) and recovery runs. The purpose of
your everyday training runs is to provide an additional training stimulus to
improve your fitness; the purpose of your recovery runs is to help you
recover from your last hard workout so you’re ready for your next hard
workout.
Recovery runs and easy- to moderate-intensity cross-training improve
blood flow through the muscles; this process improves the repair of
damaged muscle cells, removes waste products, and brings nutrients to your
muscles. These benefits are lost, however, if you do recovery runs so fast
that you tire yourself out for your subsequent hard training sessions. By
doing your recovery runs slowly, you use less of your glycogen stores, so
more glycogen is available for your hard training sessions. Optimizing your
diet to enhance recovery is discussed in chapter 2. Cross-training is
discussed briefly in chapter 3 as a recovery aid and in depth in chapter 4.
Other strategies to improve your recovery are discussed in depth in chapter
3.
PSYCHOLOGY AND ENDURANCE
--- PAGE 28 ---
Successful marathoners are mentally tough—they persevere and
push themselves to come close to reaching their physiological
potential. With experience and conscious effort, you can improve
your mental toughness.
Several studies have shown that endurance athletes have
higher pain tolerance than nonathletes despite having similar
pain thresholds. In other words, the endurance athletes and
nonathletes both felt pain at a similar level, but the endurance
athletes had a greater tolerance to withstand that pain over time.
From their regular experience of dealing with stress, the
endurance athletes knew how to tolerate temporary discomfort to
reach a goal. This trait is invaluable—during a difficult run, during
a tough stretch of training when the urge to slack off for a few
days is appealing, and, of course, on race day.
Having the right goal for your marathon—one that’s
challenging (but reasonable) and personally meaningful—also
helps build psychological strength. If your goal truly speaks to
you, you’ll be able to summon it for motivation when, inevitably,
the urge to slow, cut short, or quit arises. We’ll look at mental
skills training in more depth in chapter 4.
HOW TO TRAIN TO IMPROVE THE
KEY PHYSIOLOGICAL ATTRIBUTES
Now that we’ve discussed the physiological requirements for successful
marathoning, let’s look at the components of training that improve those
variables and how to do each type of session most effectively in your
marathon preparation. In this section, we’ll show you how to train to
improve your LT, ability to store glycogen and utilize fat, running economy
at marathon pace, and V O2max. We’ll also consider a specialized training
session. In chapters 2 and 3, we’ll look at strategies to enhance your
recovery from this targeted training.
--- PAGE 29 ---
Improving Your Lactate Threshold
The most effective way to improve LT is to run at your current LT pace or a
few seconds per mile faster, either as one continuous run (tempo run) or as a
long interval session at your LT pace (cruise intervals or LT intervals).
These workouts can be done on flat terrain, rolling hills, or uphill. It is
useful to simulate the terrain you will encounter in your marathon during
some of these sessions.
These workouts make you run hard enough so that lactate is just starting
to accumulate in your muscles and blood. When you train at a lower
intensity, a weaker stimulus is provided to improve your LT pace. When
you train faster than your current LT pace, you accumulate lactate rapidly
and cannot maintain that intensity for long. Higher intensities may also be
less effective in training your muscles to work hard without accumulating
lactate. The more time you spend close to your LT pace, the greater the
stimulus for improvement.
LT training should be run close to a pace that you can currently race for
1 hour. This should be the intensity at which lactate is just starting to
accumulate in your muscles and blood. You can do some of your tempo
runs in low-key races of 4 miles (6 km) to 10K, but be careful not to get
carried away and race all out. Remember that the optimal pace to improve
LT is your current LT pace and not much faster.
A typical training session to improve LT consists of a 15- to 20-minute
warm-up followed by a 20- to 40-minute tempo run and a 15-minute cool-
down. The LT workouts in this book mainly fall within these parameters,
although the 18-week schedules include one longer tempo run of 35 to 45
minutes. For LT intervals during marathon training, we recommend 2 or 3
repetitions at LT pace with a total duration similar to the prescribed tempo
run. We’ll give more specific advice in chapter 8 about how to convert
tempo runs into LT intervals.
WHAT ABOUT DOUBLE THRESHOLD
DAYS?
--- PAGE 30 ---
You might have heard about elite runners doing double threshold
workout days. These entail a morning and evening lactate
threshold session in the same day, usually in the form of LT
intervals. The idea is that you can accumulate more overall time
at LT intensity than in a traditional threshold workout. Also, doing
two hard sessions in one day can be intimidating enough that
you won’t be tempted to run faster than the proper intensity.
Some elites have two double threshold days each week during
part of the year.
We don’t recommend double threshold days for Advanced
Marathoning readers for a few reasons. First, double thresholds
are most often done by runners focusing on shorter races.
Continuous tempo runs provide a more appropriate stimulus for
marathoners. Second, the elites doing double threshold days are
likely to be more aerobically developed than most recreational
marathoners and, therefore, more in need of unconventional
training techniques. Third, double threshold days merit true easy
days before and after, which can interrupt the steady
accumulation of marathon-related training. Finally, there’s the
simple matter of logistics. It’s challenging enough to fit “normal”
marathon training around the other responsibilities in your life.
Regularly doing two hard sessions in one day during the work
week is more likely to harm than help your progress.
For runners competing in shorter races, tempo runs and LT intervals are
both excellent ways to prepare. For marathoners, however, tempo runs are
generally preferable to LT intervals. After all, the marathon is one long
continuous run, and tempo runs simulate marathon conditions more closely.
There’s both a physiological and a psychological component to the
advantage of tempo runs. The extra mental toughness required to get
through a tempo run when you may not be feeling great will come in handy
during a marathon.
Improving Glycogen Storage and Fat
--- PAGE 31 ---
Utilization
Your ability to store glycogen and use fat for fuel tends to improve with the
same types of training. Pure endurance training stimulates these adaptations
and increases the capillarization of your muscles. For marathoners, the
primary type of training to stimulate these adaptations is runs of 90 minutes
or longer. Your total training volume, however, also contributes. That’s one
reason to include two-a-day workouts and relatively high weekly mileage
for runners who can handle the workload in their training programs.
Long runs are vital to marathoners. For all marathoners, including the
elite, the marathon distance is a formidable challenge. To prepare to race
26.2 miles (42.2 km) at a strong pace, train your body and mind to handle
the distance by doing long runs at a steady pace. A long run also provides
psychological benefits. By running long, you simulate what your legs and
body will go through in the marathon. When your hamstrings tighten 23
miles (37 km) into the race, for example, it helps to have experienced a
similar feeling in training—you’ll know you can shorten your stride a few
inches, concentrate on maintaining your leg turnover, and keep going. More
generally, you’ll have experienced overcoming the sometimes-
overwhelming desire to do anything but continue to run. During your long
runs, you encounter many of the experiences—good and bad—that await
you in the marathon.
WHAT’S YOUR LACTATE
THRESHOLD?
The most accurate way to find out your LT is to be tested at the
track or in a sport physiology lab. During an LT test in a lab, you
run for several minutes at progressively faster speeds until your
lactate concentration increases markedly. The physiologist
measures the lactate concentration in your blood after several
minutes at each speed by pricking your finger and analyzing a
couple drops of blood. A typical LT test consists of 6 increasingly
hard runs of 4 to 5 minutes each, with 1 minute between runs to
--- PAGE 32 ---
sample your blood. LT testing can also be conducted at a track
on a calm day but requires excellent pace judgment. By graphing
blood lactate concentration at various running speeds,
physiologists can tell the pace and heart rate that coincide with
LT. You can then use this information to maximize the
effectiveness of your training.
The lower-tech method to estimate LT is to use your race
times. Remember that LT training should be run at close to the
pace that you can currently race for 1 hour. For a sub-2:30
marathoner, this is slightly faster than half marathon race pace,
whereas for a 3:00 marathoner, LT pace is about 15K race pace.
Another way to estimate LT pace for experienced runners is
about 10 to 15 seconds per mile slower than 10K race pace.
Successful marathoners generally race the marathon 2 to 3
percent slower than LT pace.
In terms of heart rate, LT typically occurs at 83 to 90 percent of
maximal heart rate or 77 to 87 percent of heart rate reserve in
well-trained runners. (Heart rate reserve is your maximal heart
rate minus your resting heart rate.) Instructions on determining
your maximal heart rate can be found later in this chapter.
No scientific evidence will tell you the best distance for your long runs
as you train. However, a clear trade-off exists between running far enough
to stimulate physiological adaptations and remaining uninjured. If you
regularly do runs longer than 24 miles (39 km), you’ll become strong but
slow because you won’t be able to maintain a high quality in your other
hard workouts. You’ll also increase your risk of injury because muscles lose
their ability to absorb impact forces when they are very fatigued.
Experience suggests that steadily building your long runs to 21 or 22
miles (34 or 35 km) will maximize your chances of reaching the marathon
in top shape while remaining healthy. Experienced marathoners who are not
highly injury prone should include one run of 24 miles (39 km) in their
preparation.
Long runs shouldn’t be slow jogs during which you just accumulate time
on your feet. The appropriate pace for a specific long run depends on the
--- PAGE 33 ---
purpose of that run within your training program. The most beneficial
intensity range for most of your long runs is 10 to 20 percent slower than
your goal marathon race pace. (A few of your long runs should be done at
your goal marathon pace. The rationale for these sessions is explained later
in this chapter.) If you use a heart monitor, your long-run pace should be in
the range of 75 to 83 percent of maximal heart rate or 66 to 77 percent of
your heart rate reserve. This will ensure that you’re running with posture
and muscle patterns similar to those used in your marathon pace. To prepare
optimally for your marathon, try to find courses for your long runs that
simulate the terrain you will encounter on race day. Practicing the uphill or
downhill that you will encounter late in your race can be invaluable to your
marathon preparation.
If you do long runs much slower than this, you risk being unprepared for
the marathon. Slow long runs reinforce poor running style and do a poor job
of simulating the demands of the marathon. If you run long runs too fast, of
course, you risk leaving your marathon performance out on your training
loops because you’ll be too tired for your other important training sessions.
Using the suggested intensity range of 10 to 20 percent slower than
marathon goal pace, table 1.1 suggests long-run paces for a wide range of
marathoners.
Table 1.1 Sample Long-Run Paces
Marathon goal
pace
Early part of long run (20%
slower than goal pace)
Latter part of long run (10%
slower than goal pace)
5:00 per mile
(3:06 per km)
6:00 per mile
(3:44 per km)
5:30 per mile
(3:25 per km)
5:30 per mile
(3:25 per km)
6:36 per mile
(4:06 per km)
6:03 per mile
(3:46 per km)
6:00 per mile
(3:44 per km)
7:12 per mile
(4:28 per km)
6:36 per mile
(4:06 per km)
6:30 per mile
(4:02 per km)
7:48 per mile
(4:51 per km)
7:09 per mile
(4:27 per km)
7:00 per mile
(4:21 per km)
8:24 per mile
(5:13 per km)
7:42 per mile
(4:47 per km)
7:30 per mile 9:00 per mile 8:15 per mile
--- PAGE 34 ---
Marathon goal
pace
Early part of long run (20%
slower than goal pace)
Latter part of long run (10%
slower than goal pace)
(4:40 per km) (5:36 per km) (5:08 per km)
8:00 per mile
(4:58 per km)
9:36 per mile
(5:58 per km)
8:48 per mile
(5:28 per km)
8:30 per mile
(5:17 per km)
10:12 per mile
(6:20 per km)
9:21 per mile
(5:49 per km)
The first few miles of your long runs can be done slowly, but by 5 miles
(8 km) into your long run, your pace should be no more than 20 percent
slower than marathon race pace. Gradually increase your pace until you’re
running approximately 10 percent slower than marathon race pace during
the last 5 miles (8 km) of your long runs. In terms of heart rate, run the first
few miles at the low end of the recommended intensity range and gradually
increase your effort until you reach the high end of the range during the last
5 miles (8 km). This makes for an excellent workout and provides a strong
stimulus for physiological adaptations. These workouts are difficult enough
that you should schedule a recovery day the day before and 1 or 2 days after
your long runs.
If you do long runs in this intensity range, a 22-mile (35 km) run will
take approximately the same amount of time as your marathon. By running
for the length of time you hope to run the marathon, you also provide
psychological reinforcement that you can run at a steady pace for that
amount of time.
When the training schedules call for a long run the day after a tune-up
race, you should run at a more casual pace. After a Saturday race, your
Sunday long run should be at a relaxed pace because you will be tired and
have stiff muscles, which increases your likelihood of injury. Start these
long runs like a recovery run. If your muscles loosen up as the run
progresses, increase the training stimulus by increasing your pace to about
15 to 20 percent slower than marathon race pace.
The total volume of your training also improves your ability to store
glycogen and use fat, and it reinforces some of the other positive training
adaptations, such as increased capillarization. There is some benefit,
--- PAGE 35 ---
therefore, to doing relatively high mileage. The best marathoners in the
world train from 110 to 160 miles (177-258 km) per week.
More is only better to a point, however. You have a unique individual
current mileage limit that is dictated by your biomechanics, past training,
injury history, shoes, running surface, diet, and various other life stressors.
(For starters, most of those people running 150 miles [241 km] a week don’t
commute to a 50-hour-per-week job.) The challenge in pursuing
marathoning excellence is to find the mileage range that you can handle
without breaking down.
Also, although racing performance improves with increased mileage, the
incremental improvement decreases. Increasing from 70 to 90 miles (113-
145 km) per week, therefore, will not improve performance as much as
increasing from 50 to 70 miles (80-113 km), but it may produce a benefit
nonetheless.
Although you have an individual current mileage limit, this limit
changes over time. The mileage that contributed to your shin splints five
years ago will not necessarily cause problems for you again. You need to be
a good detective and figure out the causes of your past injuries. Many
runners say, “I tried high mileage once years ago, and I just got tired and
hurt,” and they permanently return to what they consider to be their safe
mileage range. They don’t consider that in the ensuing years their bodies
may well have gained the ability—and their minds the wisdom—to handle
higher mileage and to reap the concomitant benefits.
Improving Your Running Economy
An important determinant of marathon performance is running economy at
marathon race pace. Because running economy gets worse with fatigue, the
ability to reduce this decrement as the race progresses will improve your
ability to maintain pace for the full distance. Improving your ability to hold
your goal pace to the finish line is one of the primary goals of this book.
Although some evidence shows that economy improves with training, no
one fully understands the secrets of improving running economy. Even less
is known about how to train to maintain economy as you become more
fatigued. Various studies have found running economy to improve with
--- PAGE 36 ---
weightlifting, biofeedback, plyometric training, uphill training, speed work,
reducing vertical motion, and long intervals.
In your early days as a runner, the most important factor for improving
economy may be the number of years (and accumulated miles) that you
have been running rather than the specific types of workouts that you do.
The mechanism for improvement may be that, with training, your fast-
twitch muscle fibers gain characteristics of the more economical slow-
twitch fibers. Renowned running physiologist and coach Jack Daniels
recommends resistance training, hill running, and fast intervals to improve
running economy. These three types of training may reduce wasted motion
and train the body to recruit the most effective combination of muscle
fibers.
For marathoners, arguably the four most worthwhile ways to try to
improve running economy while remaining uninjured are accumulating
mileage over time, resistance training, hill training, and short repetitions
(80-120 m) at a fast but relaxed pace.
Resistance training includes weightlifting and plyometrics (explosive
training), both of which have been found to improve running economy in
distance runners (Saunders et al. 2004; Barnes and Kilding 2015b).
Resistance training can improve your core strength, which enables you to
maintain good running form longer during the marathon. The right types of
resistance training may improve the stiffness of your muscles and tendons
and their springlike stretch-shortening cycle to return elastic energy. This
simply means that your muscles get better at storing energy when you land
and returning energy into your next stride. We’ll look at resistance training
in depth in chapter 4.
Running uphill is harder than training on flat terrain because of the need
to overcome the resistance of gravity. It is, therefore, another type of
resistance training but highly specific to the mechanics of running. A
comprehensive study conducted on hill training found that short hill
repetitions of 10 to 12 seconds led to the greatest improvement in running
economy (Barnes et al. 2013).
--- PAGE 37 ---
WHAT’S YOUR MAXIMAL HEART
RATE AND HEART RATE RESERVE?
Throughout this book, we’ll prescribe specific intensities for
various types of workouts to help you prepare most effectively for
the marathon. Heart rate monitors are a useful tool you can use
to check the intensity of your training. Comparing your heart rate
at the same speed (running on a track or measured stretch of
road or using GPS) provides an indication of your fitness over
time. Monitoring the intensity of your training in terms of heart
rate is simple and, with a few caveats, reliable.
Maximal Heart Rate
The intensity of your runs can be stated relative to your maximal
heart rate or as a percentage of your heart rate reserve. Your
maximal heart rate is, quite simply, the fastest that your heart will
beat during maximal-effort running. There are many formulas for
estimating maximal heart rate, and there is no general
consensus on which is most accurate. The Tanaka formula (206
minus 0.7 times age) may be most accurate for endurance-
trained men, but it tends to overestimate by several beats per
minute for endurance-trained women (Shookster et al. 2020,
Nikolaidis et al. 2018). Using this formula, a 43-year-old would
have a predicted maximal heart rate of 176 [206 − (.7 × 43)]. The
Gulati formula (206 minus 0.88 times age) has been developed
specifically for women (Gulati et al. 2010). Using the Gulati
formula, a 43-year-old woman would have a predicted maximal
heart rate of 168, but this formula was developed across a broad
range of fitness levels rather than an endurance-trained
population.
Because of the variability between individuals, your actual
maximal heart rate may be more than 10 beats per minute higher
or lower (and could be as much as 20 beats per minute higher or
lower) than your predicted maximal heart rate using any of these
--- PAGE 38 ---
equations. Using an estimated maximal heart rate, therefore, can
lead you to train too hard or not hard enough, so it’s better to do
a performance test to determine your actual maximal heart rate.
You can find your maximal heart rate quite accurately by
racing 1,500 meters or 3,000 meters while wearing a heart rate
monitor and running as hard as you can through the finish line.
You can also find your maximal heart rate by doing a very hard
interval session designed to get your heart rate to maximum. It is
important to warm up thoroughly (run easily for at least 15
minutes followed by at least 6 fast striders of 100 meters) and
then run 4 high-intensity 2.5 minute repeats up a moderate hill,
on a track, or on another surface where you can run hard safely.
If you do these efforts uphill, jog back down right away after each
one. On a track or other flat surface, jog for 90 seconds between
each effort. If you run the first two repeats at about a 95 percent
effort and run the last two efforts all out, your heart rate should
be at or within two or three beats of maximum by the end of the
last two repeats.
Even with the more individualized (and tiring) methods above,
it can be difficult to determine your true maximal heart rate.
Studies comparing the reliability of chest strap heart rate
monitors to the heart rate function on smartwatches have
consistently found that watch readings are less accurate than
chest strap monitors. That’s because chest strap monitors use
electrodes to measure the heart’s electrical activity, while
watches estimate heart rate via LED light that detects changes in
blood flow with each pulse at the wrist. Differences in skin tone
and the movement of your arms when running fast can affect
watch readings. Studies have found a difference of plus or minus
3 percent for watch readings compared to those from chest
straps. For someone with a maximal heart rate of 180 measured
by a chest strap monitor, a 3 percent difference in each direction
equates to around 175 to 185. On the plus side, those aren’t
such large variations that they would usually lead to training at
the wrong intensity.
--- PAGE 39 ---
Heart Rate Reserve
Heart rate reserve is an even more accurate way of prescribing
training intensities because it takes into account both your
maximal heart rate and your resting heart rate. Your heart rate
reserve is simply your maximal heart rate minus your resting
heart rate, and it reflects how much your heart rate can increase
to provide more oxygen to your muscles. By resting heart rate,
we mean your heart rate when you first wake up in the morning
(or recorded by a heart rate monitor overnight). As an example of
calculating heart rate reserve, Scott’s current maximal heart rate
is 188 and his resting heart rate is 38. His heart rate reserve,
therefore, is 188 minus 38, which equals 150 beats per minute.
To calculate the proper heart rates for a workout using heart
rate reserve, multiply your heart rate reserve by the appropriate
percentage and then add your resting heart rate. For example,
as a highly experienced runner, if Scott wanted to do an LT
workout at 82 to 87 percent of his heart rate reserve, he would
stay in the range of 161 [(heart rate reserve of 150 × 0.82) +
resting heart rate of 38] to 169 [(150 × 0.87) + 38] beats per
minute. This compares closely to using 86 to 90 percent of his
maximal heart rate, which would put him in the range of 162 to
169 beats per minute.
The prescribed training intensities used in this chapter and
chapter 8 are summarized in table 1.2. These intensity ranges
are appropriate for most experienced marathon runners. Less-
experienced runners should generally train at the lower end of
the recommended ranges, while elite runners will generally train
at the high end of the ranges.
Table 1.2 Heart Rate Intensities for
Standard Marathon Training Workouts
Maximal heart rate (%)Heart rate reserve (%)
V O2max (5K pace) 93-95 91-94
--- PAGE 40 ---
Maximal heart rate (%)Heart rate reserve (%)
Lactate threshold 83-90 77-87
Marathon pace 81-88 74-84
Long/medium-long 75-83 66-77
General aerobic 72-81 62-74
Recovery <75 <66
The heart rate intensities we recommend are more specific
than the general categories found in many other sources. That is
because this book focuses your training efforts toward improving
the attributes most related to marathon running success. We
have used data from marathon runners to get the ranges to be
applicable to the target audience for this book—namely,
experienced marathoners and accomplished first-timers.
As an example, our recommendation to keep recovery runs
below 75 percent of maximal heart rate (below 66 percent of
heart rate reserve) is based on the heart rates of real
marathoners during training. A variety of sources recommend
keeping heart rate during recovery runs below 60 percent of
maximum heart rate (often referred to as zone 1), but for most
marathon runners this is uncomfortably slow, so we use a higher
limit to reflect the reality of training. Keeping your heart rate
below 60 percent may work for cycling, but it is typically painfully
slow for running.
Similarly, our LT recommendation of 83 to 90 percent of
maximal heart rate (77 to 87 percent of heart rate reserve) is
based on the ranges of experienced marathoners. This is similar
to zone 4 (80 to 90 percent of max heart rate), which is
commonly used in other sources.
While not everyone fits precisely within the Advanced
Marathoning heart rate zones, these ranges work well for most
marathon runners most of the time.
--- PAGE 41 ---
Allowing for Heart Rate Drift
During an LT session or long run, your heart rate will tend to
increase even if you hold an even pace. On a warm day, your
heart rate increases even more as you become dehydrated, and
your body sends more blood to your skin to aid in cooling. This
phenomenon is discussed in greater detail in chapter 2. The
implication for your LT sessions and long runs is that you should
start these sessions at the low end of the specified intensity zone
and allow your heart rate to increase to the high end of the zone
during the workout.
On a low-humidity day with temperatures in the 70s (low 20s
Celsius), increase your heart rate zones by up to six beats per
minute to gain the same benefits as on a cooler day. On a high-
humidity day in the 70s (low 20s Celsius) or a low-humidity day
in the 80s (high 20s to 32 Celsius), increase your zones by up to
12 beats per minute. On a high-humidity day in the 80s or above
(high 20s Celsius and above), adjust your training plan and just
take it easy.
Running short repetitions quickly but with relaxed form—strides—may
train your muscles to eliminate unnecessary movements and maintain well-
coordinated control at fast speeds. Along with improved running form,
you’ll gain power in your legs and trunk that may also contribute to
improved running economy. Because these intervals are short and
performed with sufficient rest between them, lactate levels remain low to
moderate throughout the workout. As a result, they won’t interfere with
your marathon-specific workouts.
INCREASING MILEAGE WHILE
MINIMIZING THE RISK OF
BREAKDOWN
--- PAGE 42 ---
As with most aspects of running, there are no guarantees, but
the following guidelines will help you increase your mileage
without getting injured or overtrained.
Bite off small chunks. Over a few years, you may be able to
double or triple your mileage, but increasing mileage too
much at once is almost certain to lead to injury or
overtiredness. Unfortunately, there’s no scientific evidence
indicating how great an increase over a given period is
safe. A commonly used but unevaluated rule of thumb is to
increase mileage by a maximum of 10 percent per week.
Increase in steps. When charting new territory, don’t
increase your mileage week after week. That approach is
very likely to lead to injury. Instead, increase your mileage
one week, then stay at that level for a couple weeks before
increasing again.
Avoid speed work while upping your mileage. Don’t
increase your mileage during a phase of training that
includes hard speed work. Fast intervals put your body
under a great deal of stress. Increasing your mileage adds
more stress. Save the majority of your mileage increases
for base training, when you can avoid intervals.
Reduce your training intensity. When increasing your
mileage, it helps to slightly reduce the overall intensity of
your training. By backing off the intensity, you can increase
your volume without increasing the strain of training. You
can then return the intensity to its previous level before
upping your mileage again.
Not all miles are created equal. When building your
mileage, it’s particularly important to train on soft surfaces
to reduce the accumulated jarring on your body and to wear
running shoes in good repair that suit your needs.
Give yourself a break, part one. You should always monitor
the state of your running shoes but especially when
increasing your mileage. If you start to feel more frequent
--- PAGE 43 ---
minor achiness after runs or if the shoes’ midsoles feel
significantly less lively than when they were new, use them
only for short runs, if at all. If the outsoles are so worn that
you feel your gait compensating, retire the shoes.
Give yourself a break, part two. Don’t let mileage become a
goal in itself. Aimlessly running high mileage can lead to
chronic overtiredness, injury, and burnout. Your training
should be focused on a target race such as a marathon.
When you have run your target race, give your body a
break before building your mileage for your next goal.
PETE’S PROGRESSION
My highest sustained mileage was before the 1984 Olympic trials
marathon. With Alberto Salazar, Greg Meyer, Tony Sandoval,
and Bill Rodgers in the race, making the Olympic team
necessitated no compromises. My previous training had peaked
at 125 miles (201 km) per week. At the time, I thought that was
all my body could handle.
The trials were held in May. For 10 weeks starting in January, I
averaged 143 miles (230 km) per week, with a high week of 152
(245 km) and a low week of 137 (221 km). Most of this was run
at a fairly brisk pace (5:40-6:10 per mile [3:32-3:50 per km]), but I
was in base training and didn’t need to do much speed work.
After I cut my mileage to 100 to 120 miles (161-193 km) per
week for the last 2 months before the trials, my legs felt fresh
and strong all the time. Having adapted to the higher volume, I
was able to do high-quality intervals and tempo runs while still
running well over 100 miles (161 km) per week. While that
mileage looks daunting to me now, there’s little question that
January’s and February’s high-mileage training contributed to the
improvement that allowed me to win the 1984 trials.
Besides the physiological benefits, high-mileage training
provided me with psychological benefits for the marathon. When
--- PAGE 44 ---
I was coming up through the ranks, 2:10 marathoner Garry
Bjorklund revealed to me that he was running 160 miles (258
km) per week. When I asked him if that much mileage was
necessary, he said, “It’s not necessary before every marathon,
but you need to do it at least once to know you can.”
—Pete Pfitzinger
A typical session of strides is 10 repetitions of 100 meters, during which
you accelerate to full speed over the first 70 meters and then float for the
last 30 meters. It’s critical to remain relaxed during these accelerations.
Avoid clenching your fists, lifting your shoulders, tightening your neck
muscles, and so on. Concentrate on running with good form, and focus on
one aspect of good form (such as relaxed arms or complete hip extension)
during each acceleration.
These sessions aren’t designed to improve your cardiovascular system,
so allow adequate time to recover between accelerations. A typical rest is to
jog and walk 100 to 200 meters between repetitions; this allows you to
pretty much fully recover before you start the next stride. The most
important considerations are to maintain good running form and to
concentrate on accelerating powerfully during each repetition.
Another way to increase running economy is to invest in carbon-plated
super shoes, which have been shown to reduce oxygen consumptions at a
given pace by several percent (Joubert, Dominy and Burns, 2023) (see
chapter 3 for more on super shoes).
Improving Your V O2max
The most effective running intensity to improve V O2max is 95 to 100
percent of current V O2max (Daniels 2022; Midgley et al. 2007). Well-
trained runners can run at V O2max pace for about 8 minutes. Ninety-five to
100 percent of V O2max coincides with current 3,000-meter to 5,000-meter
race pace. During marathon preparation, we use intervals at 5,000-meter
race pace to provide a strong stimulus to improve your V O2max but with
less recovery required than for intervals at 3,000-meter pace. This coincides
with an intensity of approximately 93 to 95 percent of maximal heart rate or
91 to 94 percent of heart rate reserve. (Be sure to use an accurate
--- PAGE 45 ---
assessment of your current 5K pace—namely, a race run under optimal
conditions, not a hilly course on a hot day.) Running intervals at this pace or
intensity is part of the optimal strategy to improve V O2max.
The stimulus to improve V O2max is provided by the amount of time you
accumulate during a workout in the optimal intensity range. This fact has
implications for how best to structure your V O2max sessions. Consider two
workouts that each include 6,000 meters of intervals—one of 15 × 400
meters and the other of 5 × 1,200 meters. When you run 400-meter
repetitions, you’re in the optimal zone for perhaps 45 seconds per interval.
If you do 15 repetitions, you would accumulate about 11 minutes at the
optimal intensity. When you run longer intervals, you are in the optimal
intensity zone much longer. During each 1,200-meter interval, you would
be in the optimal intensity zone for 3 to 4 minutes and would accumulate 15
to 20 minutes in that zone during the workout. This would provide a
stronger stimulus to improve your V O2max.
The optimal duration for V O2max intervals for marathoners is
approximately 2 to 6 minutes. Intervals in this range are long enough that
you accumulate a substantial amount of time at 93 to 95 percent of V O2max
during each interval but short enough that you can maintain the optimal
intensity range throughout the workout. Intervals for marathoners should
generally be between 600 and 1,600 meters.
The training schedules don’t include 2,000-meter repeats. Although
repeats of this length can provide a powerful boost to V O2max, for all but
the elite they take more than 6 minutes to complete. That’s fine if you’re
focusing on a 5K or 10K, where V O2max is the primary determinant of
success. As a marathoner, though, you want to be fresh for the week’s more
important endurance workouts, so you don’t want your V O2max workouts
to require several recovery days.
The total volume of the intervals in a marathoner’s V O2max session
should be 5,000 to 10,000 meters, with most workouts in the range of 6,000
to 8,000 meters. Any combination of repetitions of 600 to 1,600 meters will
provide an excellent workout. Longer intervals (e.g., 1,200 m or 1,600 m)
make for a tougher workout, physically and psychologically, and shouldn’t
be avoided. Your V O2max workouts can be run on a track or any even
surface where you can run fast with confidence. These sessions can also be
--- PAGE 46 ---
done as uphill intervals, which are particularly useful if you will be racing a
hilly marathon. For uphill workouts, you will run much slower than 5,000-
meter race pace, but your heart rate and perceived effort should be the same
as if you were running on a flat surface.
DON’T MAX OUT YOUR V  O2MAX
WORKOUTS
Two related mistakes that marathoners sometimes make in
training are running intervals too fast and too frequently. Let’s
consider why you should avoid these errors.
Running Intervals Too Fast
A common mistake among marathoners is to do speed work too
hard. The idea that running your intervals harder will make you
run better is appealing, and it seems logical. It’s also incorrect.
Running your intervals faster than the optimal zone will do two
things—build up a high level of lactate and hydrogen ions in your
muscles and shorten the duration of your workout. Both of these
effects are counterproductive for marathoners.
The marathon is an aerobic event. More than 99 percent of the
energy you use in the marathon is supplied by your aerobic
system. During the marathon, you run slightly below your LT
pace; therefore, you don’t accumulate much lactate in your
muscles and blood. In fact, when lactate levels are measured at
the end of a marathon, they are only slightly above resting levels.
There’s no reason, then, for marathoners to do training that
builds up high levels of lactate, such as intervals run at 1,500-
meter race pace or faster. Running intervals at this pace
produces high levels of lactate and improves your ability to
produce energy using the glycolytic system (what you probably
think of as running anaerobically) and to buffer high levels of
lactate. None of these adaptations is relevant to the marathon.
--- PAGE 47 ---
Running intervals much faster than 3,000- to 5,000-meter race
pace also produces a smaller stimulus to improve your V O2max.
Running V O2max Sessions Too Frequently
Another common mistake among marathoners is trying to
include too many V O2max sessions in their marathon training
programs. The most important adaptations for marathon success
are a high level of endurance, a fast pace at LT, and the ability to
store a large quantity of glycogen in the muscles and liver.
V O2max sessions are definitely a secondary consideration for
a marathoner. Intervals require large amounts of physical and
psychological energy, which can be better used doing more
specific marathon training. V O2max sessions have their place in
marathon preparation, but they should be included sparingly.
The optimal amount of rest between intervals is debatable. One school of
thought is to minimize rest so your metabolic rate stays high during the
entire workout. This strategy makes for very difficult workouts, which can
be good, but you risk shortening your workouts. Another school of thought
is to allow your heart rate to decrease to 70 percent of your maximal heart
rate or 60 percent of your heart rate reserve during your recovery between
intervals.
A lower-tech approach is to allow 50 to 90 percent of the length of time
it takes to do the interval for your recovery. For example, if you’re running
1,000-meter repeats in 3:20, you would run slowly for 1:40 to 3 minutes
between intervals. For uphill workouts, your recovery will be somewhat
longer as you run back down the hill.
The V O2max sessions in the training schedules feature repeats that strike
a balance between being long enough to provide a powerful training
stimulus and short enough to allow you to recover for your other important
workouts of the week.
Integrated Training: Training at Marathon
--- PAGE 48 ---
Race Pace
Your goal for the marathon is to be able to maintain your goal race pace for
26.2 miles (42.2 km). The physiological demands of this task require a high
LT, an excellent capacity to store glycogen, a well-developed ability to burn
fat, and so on. Each of the various types of training that we have discussed
so far focuses on improving a specific aspect of your physiology for the
marathon. Now we’ll discuss a type of training that integrates the various
physiological attributes as specifically as possible for the marathon race.
Long runs at marathon race pace directly prepare you for the demands of
the race. The principle of specificity of training states that the most effective
way to prepare for an event is to simulate that event as closely as possible.
The closest way to simulate a marathon, of course, is to run 26.2 miles
(42.2 km) at marathon pace. Unfortunately (or perhaps fortunately), long
runs at marathon pace are very hard on the body. If you run too far at
marathon pace, the required recovery time will negate the benefits of the
effort. Similarly, if you do long runs at marathon pace too often, you will
greatly increase your likelihood of self-destructing through injury or
overtraining.
The training programs in this book include up to four runs in which
you’ll run 8 to 14 miles (13-23 km) of a longer run at goal marathon race
pace. These runs are the most specific marathon preparation you’ll do. The
intention is to stress your body in a similar way to the marathon but to limit
the duration so that your required recovery time is held to a few days. On
these runs, use the initial miles to warm up, gradually increasing to
marathon race pace, then finish the run with the prescribed number of miles
at marathon race pace. In addition to the physiological and psychological
benefits these runs impart, they’re an excellent opportunity to practice
drinking and taking energy gels at race pace.
Where should you do your marathon-pace runs? Races of the appropriate
distance are ideal—you’ll have a clear course, plenty of aid stations, and
other runners to work with. As with doing tempo runs in races, though, be
sure to limit yourself to the day’s goal and run them no faster than is called
for.
Given the opportunity for no automobiles and frequent fluids, a track
would seem to be an ideal locale for marathon-pace workouts, but bear in
--- PAGE 49 ---
mind the reason for these runs. The purpose is to simulate marathon
conditions as closely as possible. This means running on a road, not doing
endless repeats of a 400-meter oval. Learn your goal marathon’s
topography, and attempt to mimic it on your marathon-pace runs. Many
runners do this when preparing for courses with obvious quirks, such as
Boston, but the principle applies for all marathons. Pancake-flat courses
such as Chicago also take their toll because your leg muscles are used
exactly the same way from start to finish.
Wear your marathon shoes when doing at least one of these workouts.
You want to have at least one run of 15 miles (24 km) or so in your race-day
shoes to learn how they feel when you start to tire at marathon pace and
whether they give you blisters.
STRUCTURING YOUR TRAINING
PROGRAM: PERIODIZATION
Now that we’ve discussed the types of training that help improve marathon
performance, the next step is to develop your overall training plan. You
need to prepare so you’re at your best on marathon day. Systematically
structuring your training to bring you to your desired end point is called
periodization. The challenge in developing a periodized training plan is to
decide how many hard sessions to do, which types of sessions to do, and
when to do them.
A useful framework is provided by organizing training into progressively
smaller chunks called macrocycles (several months), mesocycles (several
weeks), and microcycles (one week). These concepts are used for preparing
training programs in a wide variety of sports and have been used
extensively in track and field. In this book, we will replace the scientific
jargon of macrocycle with “complete marathon training plan,” mesocycle
with “training block,” and microcycle with “training week.”
As a marathoner, your complete marathon training plan is simply the
entire training period leading up to the marathon, typically 3 to 5 months,
and your post-marathon recovery.
Your complete marathon training plan is divided into several training
blocks, each of which has one or two specific training objectives. For a
--- PAGE 50 ---
marathoner, a training block typically lasts from 4 to 6 weeks. For example,
the first training block in marathon preparation will almost always have a
primary emphasis on increasing the volume of training and the distance of
your long runs for at least 4 weeks. As the race approaches, the priorities in
your training shift. Each shift in priorities is reflected in a new training
block. Each training week has a pattern of hard workouts and recovery.
Let’s consider runners whose annual training plans center around two
marathons per year. They would train for the marathon for 12 to 18 weeks
culminating in the race, followed by several weeks to recover, before
starting focused training for the next target race.
Now let’s consider the training objectives in preparation for the
marathon. The complete marathon training plan will generally be divided
into five training blocks (table 1.3). The first training block will focus on
increasing mileage and long runs to improve pure endurance. This will
likely be the longest training block in the program. The second training
block will focus on improving LT, with further improvement of pure
endurance as a secondary objective. The third training block will focus on
race preparation and will include tune-up races. The fourth training block
will include a 3-week taper and the marathon. The fifth and final training
block will consist of several weeks of well-earned recovery.
Table 1.3 Typical Complete Marathon
Training Plan
Training blockPrimary objective
1 Increasing mileage and long runs to improve pure endurance
2 Improving LT
3 Race preparation
4 Taper and the marathon
5 Recovery
Each training week will typically consist of three hard training sessions.
This is the maximum number of hard sessions that most distance runners
--- PAGE 51 ---
can respond to positively. A few runners may be able to handle four hard
sessions per week, and some runners can handle only two. Considering that
there are at least five categories of hard training sessions that you can do, it
takes intelligent planning to come up with the optimal training program.
The training schedules in this book are structured around four training
blocks during your marathon preparation and generally include three hard
training sessions per week (with long runs counting as one of those hard
sessions).
TUNE-UP RACES
Training provides a variety of stimuli that lead to adaptations that improve
your marathon performance. Training also gives you the confidence that
comes with setting and achieving challenging training goals. However,
training doesn’t completely prepare you for the marathon. An additional
component to successful marathoning can be gained only by racing.
Tune-up races are important benchmarks of your fitness and prepare you
mentally for the rigors of racing the marathon. Because less is at stake, even
the toughest workout isn’t as mentally demanding as a race. After all, in a
race, when you’re competing against other runners, there’s a fine margin
between relative success and relative failure. Similarly, in a race, you’re
committed to finish (or you should be) whether you’re having a good day or
a lousy day; in a workout, if things aren’t going well, you can always stop
early with your pride relatively intact. The all-out aspect of racing requires
a sustained mental focus that’s necessary to run a good marathon. When
runners do no tune-up races before the marathon, they are more likely to be
anxious leading up to the race.
TECHNOLOGY AND TRAINING
Goal-oriented marathoners who don’t wear a GPS watch are a
vanishing breed. These tools are useful if you remember that
they’re tools, not your overlord.
It’s great to have reasonably accurate data on how far and fast
you’re running. That’s especially true on workouts like a long run
--- PAGE 52 ---
ending with several miles at marathon race pace, or a tempo run
over an otherwise unmeasured loop that perfectly mimics your
marathon course. Where we urge caution is making that data
determinative most of the time. For example, on your recovery
days, it’s counterproductive to force yourself to hit a certain pace
because you think anything slower isn’t beneficial. We’ll discuss
this aspect of using data in greater detail in chapter 3.
Even when there are good reasons to care about hitting a
certain pace for a certain distance, keep in mind that most
runners’ GPS watches aren’t 100 percent accurate. Cloud cover,
a winding course, and other factors can affect the devices’
measurements. Try not to get hung up over discrepancies of a
few seconds a mile, which easily fall within most watches’ margin
of error.
It’s also important to maintain perspective on sharing your run
data online. If it helps your motivation and if you’ll get a boost
from others’ support, by all means post a great long run or track
workout. But remember that the marathon is your goal, not
winning the online workout wars.
Tune-up races serve three purposes. First, they allow you to practice
your prerace routine, including your diet and warm-up. Second, they
provide feedback on your fitness, reducing an element of uncertainty about
your marathon preparation. Third, they make you go through the nerves of
racing, helping reduce anxiety in the last few days and hours before the
marathon. When you’re at your limit in the marathon, feeling tired,
wondering whether you can hang on even though there are still 10 miles (16
km) to go, it helps to have been through the demands of racing at shorter
distances. Even though the ultimate test (the marathon) is crueler, the
preparation gained from shorter races is priceless.
--- PAGE 53 ---
Description
By tune-up races, we mean all-out efforts, not races in which you give
less than your best, such as races you use as the setting for a tempo run or
marathon-pace run. Tune-up races can vary in length from 8K (5 miles) to a
half marathon, depending on their training purpose. Races of 5K or shorter
are less specific to marathon success, and races of 30K (19 miles) or longer
require too much recovery.
Tune-up race distances can be divided into two categories. Races of 15K
(9 miles) to a half marathon require at least 6 days for recovery, and you
must place them strategically in your training program. These races provide
the greatest physiological and psychological benefit. Therefore, prepare for
these races with a mini-taper of 4 to 5 days. You can’t afford to taper any
longer than 5 days because the tune-up race isn’t your primary goal, and
you need to keep training for the marathon. A tune-up race of 15K to a half
marathon really represents a training block of at least 11 days, consisting of
4 to 5 days of tapering, the race itself, and at least 6 days’ recovery before
the next hard training session.
The second category of tune-up race distances is 8K (5 miles) to 12K (7
miles). These races take less out of you and require less tapering and fewer
recovery days than races of 15K (9 miles) or longer. You can approach tune-
--- PAGE 54 ---
up races of 8K to 12K in two ways. First, you can train through them and
treat them as an all-out effort done while fatigued. This will provide an
excellent training stimulus as well as a mental challenge that will help steel
you for the marathon. Racing when tired, however, brings the danger of
believing that your finishing time and place represent your current fitness
level. If you typically race 10K (6 miles) in 32:00 but run 33:10 in a tune-
up race, you could interpret the result as meaning you’re not in shape, and
you might start to train harder or become discouraged. It’s important to put
the result in the context of the situation.
The other way to approach a tune-up race of 8K (5 miles) to 12K (7
miles) is to do a mini-taper and give yourself a couple of recovery days.
This is the appropriate approach if you’re using the race to assess your
fitness level or as a confidence booster leading up to the marathon. Table
1.4 indicates how close to a tune-up race you can do a hard workout without
going into the race fatigued. Although you won’t see the benefits of the
workout in this week’s race, you should be recovered enough so the
workout doesn’t detract from your race performance.
Table 1.4 Balancing Hard Workouts and
Tune-Up Races
Type of workout Minimum number of days before tune-up race
V O2max interval 5
Tempo run 4
Long run 4
Tempo runs are the easiest to recover from because they don’t break
down the body as much as other forms of hard training, but it is sensible to
allow 4 days before a race. Long runs require at least 4 days of recovery to
put in a good race effort, although replenishing glycogen stores generally
requires only 48 hours. Interval workouts put the body under the most stress
and require the longest time to recover.
--- PAGE 55 ---
Now you know what physiological traits are needed to run a good
marathon and how to train to improve those traits. More so than with any
other popular distance, success in the marathon depends not only on what
you do to your body but also what you put into your body. Proper nutrition
is critical when training for and running a marathon. We’ll examine this in
the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 56 ---
T
2
NUTRITION AND HYDRATION
Description
his chapter looks at two critical but often misunderstood factors in
marathon preparation and racing—nutrition and hydration. Why are
these matters critical? Because two of the factors that typically
conspire to make you slow in the last few miles of the marathon are
glycogen depletion and dehydration. By understanding the role of nutrition
--- PAGE 57 ---
for marathon preparation and racing, you can develop strategies to optimize
your marathon performance.
This chapter discusses the impact of hydration on performance and how
to prevent excessive dehydration; the roles of carbohydrate and fat as the
primary fuels for endurance exercise, and how to prevent glycogen
depletion; the role of protein for endurance athletes; the need to maintain
normal iron levels; and other nutritional considerations for racing the
marathon. Implementing the advice in this chapter is an essential
component of your marathon preparation.
THE ROLE OF HYDRATION
Staying well hydrated is vital to successful marathoning during training and
racing. Becoming excessively dehydrated negatively affects running
performance and slows your ability to recover for your next workout. Your
blood and other fluids help remove waste products and bring nutrients to
tissues for repair. Replacing lost fluids after running, therefore, will speed
your recovery.
Let’s take a look at the physiology of dehydration. When you sweat, the
following chain of events occurs:
Your blood volume decreases.
Less blood returns to your heart.
The amount of blood your heart pumps with each beat decreases.
As you continue to sweat, less oxygen-rich blood reaches your
working muscles; therefore, you produce less energy aerobically and
cannot maintain as fast a pace.
These effects are magnified on a hot day because one of your body’s
major responses to hot weather is to increase cooling by sending more
blood to the skin to remove heat from the body; this process means that
even less blood returns to the heart to be pumped to the working muscles.
The result is a higher heart rate for a given pace and an inability to maintain
the same pace as on a cool day. Looked at in another way, dehydration
reduces your body’s ability to maintain your core temperature because less
blood is available to be sent to your skin, and your sweat rate decreases.
--- PAGE 58 ---
Struggling to maintain a fast pace on a hot day becomes more dangerous as
you become progressively more dehydrated, which can lead to heat
exhaustion.
The main benefit of drinking during the marathon is to reduce
dehydration to a moderate level so running performance is not
compromised. Staying well hydrated is also important during training. The
amount of dehydration that starts to affect running performance varies
between individuals and depends on a variety of factors; nonetheless, the
greater the level of dehydration, the greater the reduction in running
performance. The American College of Sports Medicine recommends trying
to prevent dehydration of more than 2 percent of body weight (Thomas,
Erdman, and Burke 2016). Your body’s thirst mechanism will lead you to
drink enough most of the time. During a heavy training load in hot
conditions, however, it can be useful to have a plan to ensure your hydration
level is normal before running, to take in fluids during running, and to
rehydrate appropriately after running.
Marathoners training in hot conditions sometimes become moderately
dehydrated for a few days without realizing it, which can reduce training
performance and increase perceived exertion (i.e., running at a given pace
feels harder). For example, if your training schedule calls for a tempo run
on Tuesday and a medium-long run on Wednesday, and you are training in
hot or hot and humid conditions, it can be helpful to emphasize rehydration
after your tempo run to ensure you are normally hydrated for the start of
Wednesday’s medium-long run. Similarly, anyone training twice per day,
particularly in warm conditions, should put some thought into rehydrating
prior to their second run of the day. Paying attention to your hydration level
is also useful in the winter when the need to offset sweat loss isn’t as
obvious.
Sweat rates vary considerably between runners and depend on
environmental conditions, how intensely you are running, how acclimatized
you are to the conditions, and your genetic predisposition to sweating. It’s
not unusual to lose 3 to 4 pounds (1.4-1.8 kg) of water per hour when
running on a warm day. At this rate, during a 2-hour run you would lose
about 6 to 8 pounds (2.7-3.6 kg). For a 140-pound (64 kg) runner, this
represents a loss in body weight of over 4 to almost 6 percent and a likely
decrement in performance of several percent. The effect increases as the run
--- PAGE 59 ---
progresses, so this runner wouldn’t be any slower the first few miles but
would likely find that maintaining pace becomes harder and would slow
progressively later in the run. Avoiding dehydration can be the difference
between training hard enough to provide a strong stimulus for your body to
improve and feeling like you are working harder but with less benefit.
Description
MARATHONING AND CAFFEINE
Most runners have caffeine on a daily basis in coffee, tea, energy
drinks, cola, or chocolate. Caffeine is part of daily life. It can also
have a performance-enhancing effect, at least for some people.
A variety of studies have found performance-enhancing
benefits from caffeine ingestion, and several have found no
benefit (Burke 2008; Southward, Rutherfurd-Markwick, and Ali
2018; Guest et al. 2021). Extrapolating from running time trial
studies in the lab, the likely benefit of taking caffeine is in the
range of 1 to 2 percent (perhaps 20-50 sec in a 10K or 1.5-4
minutes in a marathon).
--- PAGE 60 ---
The different findings may depend on the study designs used
but may also be related to findings (Guest et al. 2018; Barreto et
al. 2024) that an individual’s genotype for a gene that influences
caffeine metabolism determines the effect of caffeine on their
performance. Individuals who have the genotype that allows
them to metabolize caffeine quickly typically get a performance-
enhancing effect, while those with the intermediate genotype
(moderate metabolizers) do not seem to receive a boost in
performance. Those with the genotype associated with slow
metabolism of caffeine typically perform worse after caffeine
ingestion.
A few studies found a reduced or no performance-enhancing
effect of caffeine for individuals who consume caffeine regularly
(Bell and McLennan 2002; Burke 2008), which led to some
athletes’ abstaining from caffeine for a week or two before
competition to try to increase the performance-enhancing effect.
Other studies, however, have found a performance-enhancing
effect from caffeine even for habitual users, particularly if they
consume more caffeine prior to competition than their typical
daily intake (Gonçalves et al. 2017). In fact, if you’re used to
having a cup of coffee each morning, abstaining from coffee
could have a detrimental effect on your performance because of
the withdrawal effects of caffeine deprivation.
The effect of caffeine that is most likely to boost performance
for marathoners is stimulation of the central nervous system,
which increases alertness and concentration. There is intriguing
evidence that central nervous system stimulation reduces the
perception of effort so that a given pace feels easier.
An appropriately conservative view is that runners should use
caffeine with the intention of improving performance only if they
are already training hard and intelligently, have an excellent diet,
and are working to optimize other lifestyle factors that influence
running performance. If you are doing everything else right and
have the right genotype, a moderate dose of caffeine may allow
you to gain a small improvement in performance. “The
International Olympic Committee Consensus Statement: Dietary
--- PAGE 61 ---
Supplements for High-Performance Athletes” (Maughan et al.
2018) reviewed the scientific literature and suggests a benefit to
performance from 3 to 6 mg of caffeine per kilogram body weight
consumed about an hour before exercise. A meta-analysis of
caffeine studies found that 6 mg per kilogram of bodyweight
provided no more benefit than 3 mg per kilogram bodyweight
(Southward, Rutherfurd-Markwick, and Ali 2018), so a lower
dose is a sensible approach. A variety of gels, sports drinks, and
other products contain specific levels of caffeine that are more
dependable than estimating how much is in your cup of coffee.
The potential side effects of caffeine include headaches,
dizziness, anxiety, nervousness, gastrointestinal distress, and
heart palpitations. Athletes vary widely in their sensitivity to and
tolerance of caffeine, so you are an experiment of one. If you do
not regularly consume caffeine, you will likely be more sensitive
to the effects. You may also not have the genotype that has a
positive performance response to caffeine intake. If you are
considering using caffeine for your marathon, practice using it
during a few of your longest training runs to see how your body
responds.
How Much to Drink
For any marathoner training in warm conditions, preventing excessive
dehydration that decreases performance is a priority. How much you need
to drink to stay well hydrated during your marathon preparation depends on
a number of factors, including the heat and humidity, your body size, how
much you’re training, how acclimatized you are to the conditions, and how
much you sweat. Because sweat rates vary greatly between individuals, it is
useful to figure out whether you are a moderate or heavy sweater so you
can better plan your personal hydration needs.
On top of your baseline fluid needs, you need to add your fluid losses
from training and other activities. Weigh yourself before and after running
and calculate how much weight you lost, then drink with the objective of
bringing your weight back up to normal. Becoming fully hydrated typically
--- PAGE 62 ---
requires drinking about one and a half times the amount of fluid weight you
lost—the extra amount is required because some of what you drink will
quickly wind up as urine. So, for example, if you lost 3 pounds (1.4 kg)
during a training run, you would need to drink about 4.5 pounds (2 L) of
fluid before your next run to be fully rehydrated. Sodium in your food and
drinks provides the benefit of enabling your body to retain more of the fluid
you take in.
Maintaining normal hydration levels from day to day requires some
planning, particularly for those with normal jobs. Keeping a water bottle at
your workstation is a must. You’ll maintain your hydration status most
effectively if you discipline yourself to drink regularly throughout the day.
Try to avoid waiting until shortly before training to replace your fluids—if
you rush the process, you’ll go into your workout either bloated from too
much fluid ingested too quickly or dehydrated from not having enough
fluid. Once again, while not sweating profusely, your thirst mechanism is a
good guide, but if you feel thirsty before the start of a run, your hydration
level is likely somewhat low.
How much you should drink during your race is discussed in the
“Marathon Race-Day Nutrition and Hydration” section later in this chapter.
What to Drink
During the many hours a day you’re not running, water should be your
primary beverage. Few people need to sip sport or energy drinks throughout
the day. Water and carbohydrate-replacement drinks that contain sodium are
excellent for maintaining hydration during running. The advantage of
replacement drinks with 6 to 8 percent carbohydrate is that they’re absorbed
as quickly as water and also provide readily usable energy. The
carbohydrate can help your performance during workouts lasting longer
than 1 hour. The exact carbohydrate concentration that’s best for you will
depend on your stomach’s tolerance and how warm it is during training and
during your marathon. On a cool day, you may want to use a carbohydrate
content of 8 percent, whereas on a warm day, when fluid is likely more
critical than extra carbohydrate, you may want to use a drink with 6 percent
carbs. Many sports drinks are now designed with more than one type of
carbohydrate (typically glucose-fructose mixtures) to increase the rate that
--- PAGE 63 ---
is absorbed in the intestines. Sports drinks should also contain at least 110
mg of sodium per 8 fluid ounces to enhance glucose and water absorption
and improve fluid retention.
Many of the world’s top marathoners now use a carbohydrate hydrogel
(CHO-hydrogel) drink and gels during races. The CHO-hydrogel drink
comes in two concentrations, with the higher concentration providing 80
grams of carbs per half liter (16 percent carbohydrate), which allows
runners to take in more carbs per hour. Drinks with more than 8 percent
carbohydrate have traditionally been problematic for runners because their
high concentration slows gastric emptying, leading to bloating and other
gastrointestinal issues. According to the manufacturer, the CHO-hydrogel
drink gets around that problem by turning into a hydrogel once it reaches
the stomach, which is rapidly absorbed through the stomach lining. Elite
marathoners often alternate taking in the CHO-hydrogel drink at some aid
stations and gels at other aid stations, aiming for 50 to 60 grams of
carbohydrate per hour.
Scientific evidence on CHO-hydrogel drinks is still emerging
(McCubbin et al. 2020, Rowe et al. 2022, Sutehall et al. 2022) with some
support for reduced gastrointestinal distress, faster use of the carbohydrates
ingested, and improved performance. More studies are needed that simulate
the intensity of marathon racing, in which faster gastric emptying and
carbohydrate availability would provide a distinct performance advantage.
Top level marathoners are also using the CHO-hydrogel drinks during
their higher-intensity long runs to enhance performance during those
workouts and to ensure they tolerate the drinks well. As with anything new,
curious runners should try out these drinks in training before using them on
race day.
Attempting to do high-mileage or high-intensity training in hot weather
is a physiological challenge that requires you to be flexible with your
training schedule. By planning your training, you can minimize the impact
of hot weather. Start each workout fully hydrated by making rehydration a
priority after the previous day’s run. When possible, run at the time of day
when the weather is the least taxing on your body. On a hot, humid day,
slow your pace from the outset rather than waiting until your body forces
you to slow.
--- PAGE 64 ---
MARATHONING AND ALCOHOL
Alcohol is part of many runners’ diets. Is that good or bad for
your running performance?
Alcohol (ethyl alcohol) primarily affects your brain. One or two
drinks temporarily lead to reduced tension and relief from stress.
In the short term, they will also increase dehydration and slow
down rehydration. Where should you strike the balance? The
night before your marathon, reduced tension is a good thing, but
as discussed earlier, it is wise to avoid any amount of
dehydration as you toe the starting line. With this in mind, it’s
best to limit yourself to one beer or one small glass of wine the
night before the marathon. Take in enough extra fluid to make up
for the dehydrating effect of the alcohol. Drink an extra ounce (30
mL) of water for each ounce of beer and an extra 3 ounces (89
mL) of water for each ounce of wine that you drink. The same
guideline holds for the night before a long run.
After training or racing, wait until you’re reasonably well
rehydrated to enjoy a post run potable. Imbibing while you’re still
dehydrated from running will slow your recovery.
There is great variance in how much alcohol runners can
tolerate. How much is too much? Be honest with yourself about
whether drinking regularly detracts from your running, such as by
lowering your sleep quality or making you groggy and
dehydrated when you wake. And right before training or racing—
well, let’s not go there.
CARBOHYDRATES AND THE
MARATHONER
The main fuels for endurance exercise are carbohydrate and fat. Protein also
provides a small amount of energy. Carbohydrate supplies the majority of
your energy during the marathon, and fat supplies the bulk of the remainder.
If you want to run 26.2 miles (42.2 km) at a good pace, you had better like
--- PAGE 65 ---
carbohydrate foods because they’ll be a mainstay of your diet during most
of your day-to-day training and especially in the final few days before the
marathon.
Even if you’re a lean marathoner, your body has a large stockpile of
energy in the form of fat. A 140-pound (64 kg) runner with a body fat level
of 6 percent still carries around 8.4 pounds (3.8 kg) of fat. Each pound of
fat supplies 3,500 calories of energy, so this individual has more than
29,000 calories stored as fat.
For the purposes of fast marathoning, what matters are your reserves of
carbohydrate, not fat, and your carbohydrate stores are much more limited.
If you do a good job of carbohydrate loading, you can store about 2,000 to
2,500 calories of glycogen (the body’s storage form of carbohydrate).
When you run, your body burns a mixture of carbohydrate and fat. The
harder you run, the higher the proportion of carbohydrate you use; the
slower you run, the higher the proportion of fat you use. During walking,
more than half of the calories you burn are provided by the breakdown of
fat. As your pace increases, you use proportionately less fat and more
carbohydrate. An easy recovery run may be fueled by 60 percent
carbohydrate and 40 percent fat. When you race the marathon, over 75
percent of the fuel you use is supplied by the breakdown of carbohydrate.
For those doing a marathon at their normal easy-run pace, the proportion of
carbohydrate used would be somewhat lower.
Carbohydrate is a more efficient energy source than fat. The breakdown
of fat requires more oxygen per calorie released than does carbohydrate.
Because fat metabolism doesn’t produce energy aerobically as efficiently as
carbohydrate metabolism does, you can’t run as fast when burning just fat.
Your body uses several strategies to keep you from running out of
carbohydrate stores. One of these strategies is to use relatively more fat as
your carbohydrate stores become low. When your glycogen stores become
critically low, you experience “hitting the wall” or “bonking.” A problem
with glycogen depletion is that there aren’t warning signs that it’s going to
occur until it’s too late. When you need to slow suddenly in a marathon, the
culprit is probably glycogen depletion, not dehydration, which tends to
affect you more gradually.
You can prevent carbohydrate depletion by glycogen loading. Glycogen
loading (also known as carbohydrate loading) is the practice of
--- PAGE 66 ---
manipulating your diet and training to increase your glycogen stores.
Marathoners can increase their glycogen stores for race day by tapering
training and eating a high-carbohydrate diet for 3 days before the race as
recommended in the training programs in chapters 9 through 13.
Rice, pasta, bread, sweet potatoes, pancakes, bagels, low-fiber cereals,
potatoes, corn, and low-fiber fruits are excellent sources of carbohydrate. In
the last 24 hours before the marathon, you can further increase your carb
intake with fun foods such as baked goods, pretzels, crackers, and sports
drinks. Expect to gain a couple of pounds and feel slightly bloated when
you glycogen load because your body stores 2.6 grams of water for every
gram of glycogen. The added weight shows that you have done a good job
of glycogen loading, and the stored water may help prevent dehydration as
the marathon progresses.
If you eat a normal runner’s diet, with about 60 percent of your calories
from carbohydrates, you probably store about 1,500 to 2,000 calories of
glycogen in your muscles. If you glycogen load, however, your muscles
have the capacity to store about 2,000 to 2,500 calories of glycogen. Each
mile (1.6 km) that you run burns about 90 to 140 calories, depending on
your weight and metabolism, and over 75 percent of those calories are
supplied by carbohydrate. If you do a great job of loading, you may have
just about enough glycogen for the marathon, or more likely not quite
enough.
Glycogen loading is also useful before your long runs so you have plenty
of fuel to go the distance. Carbohydrate loading before your long runs will
help ensure that those runs are high quality, which will increase your
confidence for the marathon. For some of your long runs, however, it may
be beneficial to allow your glycogen tank to run low to stimulate increased
glycogen storage. This strategy, called train low/race high, is explained in
the sidebar.
TRAIN LOW/RACE HIGH
In chapter 1, we discussed that one of the adaptations to
endurance training is the ability to store more glycogen. This
occurs because running low on glycogen provides a stimulus for
--- PAGE 67 ---
increased activity of the glycogen synthase enzyme, which leads
to increased glycogen storage. Evidence suggests that there
may be other benefits to allowing your glycogen stores to run low
during some of your training runs, including increased
mitochondrial content, increased aerobic enzyme activity,
increased gene expression, and increased ability to oxidize fat
(Stellingwerff 2013; Bartlett et al. 2015; Impey et al. 2018).
Elite distance runners have used this “train low” approach for
decades (without understanding the scientific rationale) by doing
long runs in the morning with little or no carbohydrate intake and
running twice per day with their glycogen stores partially
depleted during the second workout of the day.
The most convenient way to train low is to do a long training
run in the morning before breakfast (or after a very small
breakfast) or at least 6 hours after a meal. It is not yet clear how
much or how often depletion is needed to stimulate these
adaptations, but as with any change to your training, try this
approach cautiously so you have plenty of energy for most of
your training. With glycogen depletion there is a risk of delayed
recovery from training and immune system suppression.
Allowing your glycogen stores to run low (but not become
entirely depleted) about twice per week may provide a useful
balance between gaining the positive adaptations from training
low without it becoming a drag on your enthusiasm for training.
Start with a moderately long run without stocking up on carbs
before or taking carbs during the run, and progressively increase
the length or intensity of the run from week to week. If you feel a
bit more fatigued than usual in the last couple miles of your run,
you have probably gauged it about right. If you feel wiped out
during the latter stages of your run and need a couple days’
recovery, you have overdone it and should start with a shorter,
easier run or avoid this training strategy altogether.
--- PAGE 68 ---
How Much Carbohydrate Do You Need in
Your Daily Training Diet?
Your daily carbohydrate requirement depends on your weight and how
much you’re training. If you’re averaging an hour to an hour and a half of
training per day, you need approximately 2.3 to 3.2 grams of carbohydrate
per pound (5-7 g/kg) of your body weight per day. If you’re training for an
hour and a half to two hours per day, you need approximately 3.2 to 3.9
grams of carbohydrate per pound (7-8.5 g/kg) of body weight per day.
Training for 2 hours or more per day requires at least 3.6 grams of
carbohydrate per pound (8 g/kg) of body weight per day.
As an example, say Gary is running 70 miles (113 km) per week and
weighs 154 pounds (70 kg). For Gary, the 70 miles (113 kg) per week is an
average daily training time of about 80 minutes. Gary’s daily carbohydrate
requirement is 350 to 490 grams (70 × 5 to 70 × 7). Each gram of
carbohydrate supplies 4.1 calories, so Gary’s calorie supply from
carbohydrate should be about 1,400 to 2,000 per day.
SHOULD YOU GO GLUTEN-FREE?
For much of the modern marathon era, runners took a more-is-
better approach to gluten, or at least to the foods where it’s most
commonly found—pasta, bread, bagels, muffins, and the like.
More recently, the pendulum has swung in the other direction.
One survey (Lis et al. 2015) of predominantly competitive
endurance athletes found that 40 percent avoid gluten, far
greater than the portion of the population thought to be
diagnostically sensitive to gluten. Anecdotally, you may have
encountered many fellow runners who say they try to avoid
gluten. As in most matters in running, the best approach for most
people lies somewhere between the extremes.
Gluten is a protein found in wheat, barley, and rye. In North
America and Europe, about 1 percent of the population has
celiac disease, an autoimmune disorder in which eating gluten
causes damage to and inflammation in the small intestine.
--- PAGE 69 ---
Untreated celiac disease can lead to poor nutrient absorption
and a cascade of symptoms (diarrhea, bloating, fatigue,
osteoporosis) that can harm normal health, not to mention
marathon training and performance. The best treatment for celiac
disease is a strict gluten-free diet. High-level marathoning on
such a diet is possible, as evidenced by the success of runners
such as Stephanie Bruce, an American with a personal best of
2:27.
Things get a little trickier when the topic is gluten sensitivity or
gluten intolerance. It’s estimated that about 5 to 6 percent of the
population has some degree of sensitivity or intolerance. Some
of the symptoms are similar to those of celiac disease (such as
fatigue, headaches, and gastrointestinal issues), but there’s no
reliable test for the condition. And it’s quite possible that many
people’s symptoms aren’t caused by gluten per se (Lis et al.
2015). For example, bloating could stem from eating too much
fiber, which glutenous foods such as whole-wheat bread are
usually high in. Similarly, a challenging workout like a long tempo
run will mean blood is diverted from your stomach, potentially
leading to short-term trouble digesting glutenous foods. Eating
the same foods long after the run might not cause symptoms.
If you’re not gluten sensitive, you might think there’s no harm
in going gluten-free. But there’s unlikely to be a gain, either. In
general, dietitians don’t recommend avoiding an entire class of
food without good reason. If you think you might have gluten
sensitivity or intolerance, start by keeping detailed records of
your diet, symptoms, and running performance to see if you can
identify trends. If you decide you might be in the small minority of
the population with the condition, consult a sports dietitian.
Sara Hall
Fastest marathon: 2:20:32 (Marathon Project, 2020)
--- PAGE 70 ---
Marathon highlights: Second, 2020 London; U.S. masters
record
Sara Hall has run in every U.S. Olympic Trials from 2004
through 2024, in events from the 1,500 meters to the marathon,
and has won national titles in the mile, cross country, and
marathon. Underlying this long, varied résumé is what she calls
“love of the grind.” Hall loves to set challenging goals, she loves
the training needed to take on those goals, and she loves the
races in which she attempts to meet those goals.
One way that Hall has maintained that love, from high school
star through masters record-setter, has been by pursuing her
interests. She considers various goals and commits to one or
more only if she feels an irresistible pull to chase it. When she
lands on a goal, she shares it with her husband, two-time
Olympic marathoner Ryan Hall, and others close to her. She
--- PAGE 71 ---
also writes it down and posts it where she’ll see it daily, such as
on a mirror or refrigerator.
Pursuing her top interests is why she’s been so successful at
so many events. It’s also why she has occasionally made
unconventional racing choices. In 2015, just 13 days after her
marathon debut, she placed 20th overall and first American at
the world cross country championship. In 2019, she won her
third consecutive U.S. title at 10 miles one week after lowering
her marathon best to 2:22 at Berlin. And in 2020, just two
months after a career highlight of placing second at the London
Marathon, she targeted Deena Kastor’s then-U.S. record of
2:19:36. Although Hall didn’t better Kastor’s mark, she netted a
personal best of 2:20:32, which at the time made her the
second fastest American in history.
Hall’s love of the grind is underlaid with self-belief—
specifically, belief that she hasn’t yet reached her potential in a
given event and should therefore keep at it. At one point, Hall’s
race results were so underwhelming that her in-laws and even
some teammates urged her to retire from professional running
to better support Ryan, who at the time was the top U.S.
marathoner. Although stung by that “advice,” Hall heeded her
internal voice that her best running was still ahead of her. She
kept that faith even after running 2:48—about 20 minutes
slower than hoped for—in her first marathon. Subsequent
marathons proved her right.
In addition to loving the training it takes to be a top
marathoner, Hall is dedicated to helping her body handle that
training, especially now that she’s in her 40s. She’s in her home
gym most days, emphasizing core stability work and functional
movements such as dead lifts. She fuels herself primarily with
nutrient-dense, unprocessed foods, including soon after
finishing training. But here, too, she follows her instincts,
happily stopping for pizza after a run if that’s what feels right.
Payoffs for all of these practices include a former U.S. record
in the half marathon and the U.S. masters marathon record.
These are great stand-alone accomplishments, of course. But
--- PAGE 72 ---
they could also be viewed as bonuses for what Hall would be
doing anyway, in her runner’s version of, “If you love what you
do, you’ll never work a day in your life.”
High-Fat/Low-Carb Diets
Much has been written on high-fat/low-carb (HFLC) diets for endurance
athletes. A typical HFLC diet calls for 60 to 75 percent of calories from fat,
up to 20 percent of calories from protein, and no more than 20 percent of
calories from carbohydrates. The more extreme versions are also called
ketogenic, or keto, diets because these diets increase ketosis, which occurs
when the body metabolizes fat at a high rate and converts fatty acids to
ketones. Keto diets typically include 75 to 80 percent fat, 15 to 20 percent
protein, and less than 5 percent carbohydrates (Burke 2021). A number of
ultra endurance athletes have switched to a HFLC diet, and a growing
number of studies are looking into the impact of these diets on the
metabolism of fats and carbohydrates, weight loss, blood lipid levels, and
performance.
Studies have found that a HFLC diet increases fat oxidation even if the
athlete is only on the diet for a short time (Burke 2021). Longer-term
studies have found an increased proportion of fat oxidation at moderately
high exercise intensities (up to about 70 percent V O2 max); in other words,
subjects burned relatively more fat at 70 percent of V O2 max while on a
long-term HFLC diet (Volek et al. 2016). Theoretically, this adaptation
could help when racing a marathon in that you wouldn’t burn as much
glycogen at a given pace and could therefore reduce your risk of hitting the
wall.
Subjects tend to lose several pounds on a HFLC diet (McSwiney et al.
2018), likely due to less storage of water with lower glycogen stores and
ketosis, and some maintain a lower body weight over time. On the other
hand, there is evidence that exercise economy (the equivalent of running
economy) is decreased on the HFLC diet, meaning more oxygen is required
to maintain a given speed (Impey et al. 2018), and the ability to oxidize
carbohydrates for fuel may be impaired (Burke 2021). Given that
experienced marathon runners typically race at about 75 to 84 percent of
--- PAGE 73 ---
V O2 max, reduced economy and reduced ability to burn carbs for fuel could
limit performance for serious marathon runners.
Studies and anecdotal evidence have found that runners feel fatigued and
endurance performance decreases in the first few weeks on a HFLC diet,
but the fatigue decreases over time and training capacity gradually returns
to its normal level (Zinn et al. 2017; Burke 2021). As would be expected,
studies have found that high-intensity exercise performance decreases on a
HFLC diet, so the ability to do interval workouts such as 1,200-meter
repeats at 5K race pace would likely be impaired (Burke 2021). It is not
clear whether training at the intensity required for lactate threshold
workouts (e.g., tempo runs) can be conducted as effectively on a HFLC
diet, but with long-term adaptation that may be the case.
Some athletes on HFLC diets have been using an extreme version of the
“Train Low/Race High” approach, which was discussed earlier in this
chapter, by taking in more carbohydrates for 24 to 48 hours before racing
and taking in carbs during the race. This method may reduce the potential
downsides of a strict HFLC diet but is complex and would likely require
some trial and error to get the formula right.
Currently, there is not enough evidence to recommend that marathon
runners, particularly those who are trying to maximize their performance,
switch to a HFLC diet. To date, the majority of evidence supports the view
discussed in this chapter that carbohydrates are the primary fuel source for
marathon training and racing. In coming years, more evidence will emerge
on this interesting topic, but for now it is premature to change from the
conventional approach of providing enough carbohydrates to fuel your
training.
Tips to Replenish Your Glycogen Stores
If you follow a typical runner’s high-carbohydrate diet, you probably have
enough glycogen to get you through an 18- to 22-mile (29-35 km) run or a
hard interval workout. After a long run or a long interval workout,
therefore, your glycogen stores are moderately to highly depleted. It
typically takes 24 to 48 hours to completely replenish your glycogen stores.
So, when you do two long or hard workouts in a row, you risk going into
the second workout with only partially filled glycogen stores, becoming
--- PAGE 74 ---
depleted, and compromising your workout. The frequency with which you
can train hard is determined by your recovery rate between workouts, and
this will be increased by replenishing your glycogen stores quickly.
Here are strategies you can use to increase your rate of glycogen
replenishment.
•  Don’t wait. Your body stores glycogen at a faster rate during the
first two hours after exercise and at the fastest rate during the first 30
minutes after exercise, so have a carbohydrate drink with you when you
finish your long runs or other glycogen-depleting workouts. Bring along
some easy-to-digest carbohydrate foods as well. To speed glycogen
resynthesis, take in half of a gram per pound of body weight (1.2 g/kg) in
the first hour after the workout and another half gram per pound of body
weight during the next hour, and have a meal within 3 hours of finishing
training.
•  Increase your intake of carbohydrate. After a glycogen-depleting
workout, increase your carbohydrate intake to at least 3.6 grams per pound
of body weight (8 g/kg) during the next 24 hours.
•  Eat moderate- or high-glycemic index foods during the first few
hours after the workout. The glycemic index of a food is determined by the
effect it has on your blood glucose level. High-glycemic index foods cause
a large increase in blood glucose levels, whereas low-glycemic index foods
have a lesser effect. During the first few hours after a workout, your
glycogen stores will be replenished more quickly if you consume moderate-
or high-glycemic index foods, such as sports drinks, recovery bars, fruit
bars, potatoes, rice cakes, bread, bagels, raisins, and crackers.
•  Consume some protein with your carbohydrates. A moderate
amount of protein (e.g., 15-25 g) within 2 hours of training has been shown
to stimulate protein synthesis for muscle repair, so it is beneficial to
consume protein and carbs together after training.
Nancy Clark’s Sports Nutrition Guidebook 6th edition is an excellent and
extensive resource for more information on nutrition for endurance athletes.
--- PAGE 75 ---
THE ROLE OF PROTEIN FOR
MARATHONERS
Conventional wisdom indicates that strength-trained athletes such as
weightlifters need lots of extra protein to build muscle, but the protein
needs of endurance athletes are the same as for sedentary folks. Over the
past decade, however, studies have clearly shown that endurance athletes
have elevated protein needs. As a marathoner, your body needs protein to
repair damaged muscles, make red blood cells to deliver oxygen to your
muscles, make mitochondria in your muscles to produce energy aerobically,
maintain a strong immune system, and make enzymes and hormones that
keep your body functioning normally.
Sedentary individuals need about 0.35 to 0.45 grams of protein per
pound of body weight per day (0.8-1.0 g/kg per day). Endurance athletes
have elevated protein needs because of their greater wear and tear on
muscle tissue and red blood cells, need for more mitochondria, and so on.
Several formulas are used for calculating the protein needs of endurance
athletes. The American College of Sports Medicine’s guideline for protein
intake for endurance athletes had previously been 0.55 to 0.64 grams of
protein per pound of body weight (1.2-1.4 g/kg of body weight), but this
range was recently broadened to 0.55 to 0.91 grams of protein per pound of
body weight (1.2-2.0 g/kg of body weight) to take into account the specifics
of the athlete’s training and the timing of protein intake (Thomas, Erdman,
and Burke 2016).
Sports dietitian and former elite runner Suzanne Girard Eberle
recommends 0.55 to 0.75 grams of protein per pound of body weight (1.2-
1.7 g/kg of body weight) per day for endurance athletes (Eberle 2014). The
protein requirements for moderately trained runners would tend to be
toward the lower end of this range and toward the higher end for elite
marathoners. Table 2.1 presents daily protein requirements for marathoners
using this formula.
Table 2.1 Daily Protein Requirements for
--- PAGE 76 ---
Marathoners
Weight (lb) Weight (kg) Protein required (g/day)
100 45 55-75
120 54 66-90
140 64 77-105
160 73 88-120
180 82 99-135
200 91 110-150
The timing of protein intake influences recovery. One study found that
30 grams of protein consumed after exercise had the highest rate of muscle
protein synthesis (Churchward-Venne et al. 2020). The American College of
Sports Medicine suggests 15 to 25 grams of protein (or 0.25-0.3 g/kg of
body weight) consumed in the first 2 hours after exercise (Thomas, Erdman,
and Burke 2016). You can easily get this much protein through foods such
as hard-boiled eggs, milk, yogurt and other dairy products, peanut butter,
tuna, deli meats, etc. Protein shakes and protein bars are other convenient
options.
Although the protein intake of most Americans exceeds their
requirements, this is not necessarily the case for marathoners, particularly
those who restrict some aspect of their diets. For example, if you’re a
vegetarian, it’s not difficult to meet your protein requirements, but it does
require some knowledge and planning to ensure you eat a variety of foods
to provide all of the essential amino acids.
Eating too much protein can also have negative consequences for your
running performance. If you eat too much protein, you may not be
consuming enough carbohydrate, so such a diet would reduce your energy
levels. Your body would use the excess protein as energy by removing the
amino groups and oxidizing the resulting carbon skeleton. This process
requires the removal of waste products, which can stress the kidneys.
--- PAGE 77 ---
THE IMPORTANCE OF IRON
Iron is vital to running performance. Despite this importance, many runners
don’t monitor their iron levels.
Iron is necessary for producing hemoglobin in your red blood cells.
Oxygen attaches to hemoglobin to be transported in your blood to your
muscles. If your hemoglobin level is low, less oxygen reaches your
muscles, which means your muscles can’t produce as much energy
aerobically. The result is that your V O2max and lactate threshold are
reduced, and you can’t maintain as fast a pace. In addition, iron is a key
component of myoglobin (a protein that stores oxygen in your muscles) and
many other substances in the body, such as enzymes in your muscle cells
that affect aerobic energy production, so low iron levels may cause low
energy levels by altering production of these other substances.
Typical marathoners need to ensure that they do not have a low red
blood cell count or low iron stores. Low iron levels may be the most
prevalent nutrition deficiency in Western marathoners, particularly for
premenopausal female runners. With iron-deficiency anemia, your iron
stores are gone and your hemoglobin level is reduced. With iron depletion,
on the other hand, your iron stores are very low, and your hemoglobin is
still in the normal range. Although anemia is more detrimental, both of
these conditions can negatively affect your running performance.
Why Do Marathoners Tend to Have Lower
Iron Levels?
Runners may have slightly lower hematocrit and hemoglobin levels than do
sedentary folks due to increased blood volume. Runners may have
relatively low iron stores due to low iron intake, foot-strike hemolysis,
damage to red blood cells from muscle contraction, and iron loss through
sweat, urine, and the gastrointestinal (GI) system. For marathoners, the iron
losses tend to be higher than for those doing shorter races, primarily
because of higher training volumes. Let’s look at each of these factors.
--- PAGE 78 ---
THE NO-MEAT MARATHONER
People follow a vegetarian or vegan diet for many reasons—
primarily health, ethical, or environmental—but few do so
primarily to improve their running. Is it possible to run your best
marathon while not eating animals or, in the case of veganism,
any animal products?
The short answer is yes, but you will need to pay more
attention to your diet than you would otherwise.
That extra attention isn’t necessarily a negative. Of course,
you could live on candy bars and potato chips and call yourself a
vegetarian, but your running performance would eventually go
downhill. Following a plant-based diet usually means greater
awareness of the nutritional value of foods and striving to eat
high-quality, nutrient-dense items. This is one reason that
vegetarians and vegans tend to have better profiles in general
health measures such as cholesterol and body mass index than
the average person.
But what about marathoning? The few studies that have
compared vegetarian athletes to omnivorous athletes have found
the groups to be roughly similar on a variety of measures,
including running performance. There is also no evidence that a
well-planned vegetarian or vegan diet will lead to being deficient
in protein (Craig and Mangels 2009).
As noted on page 48, the biggest potential challenge for
marathoning vegetarians and vegans has to do with iron. Up to
10 percent of iron from plant sources is absorbed, compared to
more than twice as much from meat sources. And that assumes
you’re regularly eating large amounts of iron-rich plants, such as
tofu, dried fruit, and dark green leafy vegetables such as spinach
and kale. The same problem of lesser bioavailability from plant
sources occurs with some macronutrients that have a role in
endurance performance, such as vitamin B12, zinc, and omega-3
fatty acids. These concerns are reduced for lacto-ovo
vegetarians who consume dairy products and eggs, lacto-
--- PAGE 79 ---
vegetarians who consume dairy products but not eggs, and
pescatarians who include fish in their diets. In addition to the
dietary requirements discussed above, vegans can also be short
on calcium, which plays a key role in bone health.
For these reasons, it is likely worth consulting a dietitian to
ensure you are meeting your nutritional requirements if you
follow a vegetarian or vegan diet.
•  Increased blood volume. Endurance athletes have more blood than
do sedentary people. This adaptation allows the stroke volume of the heart
to increase, which allows V O2max to increase. This is a good thing. The
iron in a runner’s red blood cells, therefore, is diluted in a greater volume of
blood. If the runner’s red blood cell mass doesn’t increase as much as the
blood volume, hemoglobin concentration will decrease and may incorrectly
indicate a borderline iron deficiency.
•  Low iron intake. Many endurance athletes have low iron intakes.
Low iron intake can be a problem for vegetarians and runners who eat red
meat less than twice a week. The typical high-carbohydrate, low-fat, low-
cholesterol runner’s diet often includes little or no red meat. Red meat
contains heme iron, which is more easily absorbed than iron from plant
sources (nonheme iron). Runners who don’t eat meat can obtain sufficient
iron through dietary sources but only by carefully selecting their foods.
Enette Larson-Meyer and Matt Ruscigno’s book Plant-Based Sports
Nutrition (2020) is a good resource for more information on proper
nutrition for athletes who limit or avoid meat. The No Meat Athlete
Cookbook by Matt Frazier and Stepfanie Romine (2017) is a good recipe
source. For more on marathoning while following a vegetarian or vegan
diet, see the sidebar “The No-Meat Marathoner.”
•  Foot-strike hemolysis and damage from muscle contractions. Foot-
strike hemolysis is the breakdown of red blood cells when the foot hits the
ground. Foot-strike hemolysis is a factor for marathoners who run high
mileage on asphalt or are heavier than most runners. In addition, evidence
from athletes across a range of sports suggests that muscle contractions
from heavy training loads can also damage red blood cells.
--- PAGE 80 ---
•  Iron loss through sweat and urine. A relatively small amount of iron
is lost through sweat and urine, but for high-mileage runners training in hot,
humid conditions, this iron loss may add up. For marathoners living in the
South or training through the summer in preparation for a fall marathon,
sweat may be a significant source of iron loss.
•  Iron loss through the GI system. Loss of iron through the GI tract
(primarily the stomach or large intestine) is a problem for some
marathoners. Low levels of GI bleeding occur in some runners, especially
during prolonged or high-intensity training. The bleeding is fairly minor
each time and generally not noticeable, but there may be a cumulative effect
over years of running.
All the preceding factors in combination make it important for
marathoners to monitor their iron intake and their iron levels. The highest
risk occurs in premenopausal female runners, whose iron intake often
doesn’t meet their needs.
How Do You Know if You Have Low Iron?
If you have low iron, first, you’ll be dragging. Your heart rate may be
elevated, and your enthusiasm for running will have sunk. You may also
feel cold much of the time and have generalized fatigue throughout the day.
These symptoms tend to come on gradually, however, so you may not
suspect that you have low iron levels until they’ve had a large impact on
your training. You can confirm your suspicions only with a blood test. Ask
your doctor to order a complete blood count (CBC)—which measures your
hemoglobin level (the iron in your red blood cells), your hematocrit level
(the percentage of red blood cells in your blood), and other blood values—a
ferritin test (your body’s iron stores), and other iron studies.
Normal hemoglobin concentration ranges vary between countries and
labs but are typically from 14 to 18 grams per deciliter (g/dL) of blood for
men and 12 to 16 g/dL of blood for women; for an endurance athlete, the
lower end of normal should be extended by about 0.5 g/dL because of their
larger blood volume.
Normal serum ferritin levels vary between countries and labs, but typical
ranges are 12 to 200 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) for women and 12 to
300 ng/mL for men.
--- PAGE 81 ---
A decrease in your ferritin level (iron stores) can be viewed as an early
warning sign that you are not consuming or absorbing enough iron in your
diet and that eventually your hemoglobin level and performance will
decline too. Ferritin also reflects the iron stores the body can use to make
enzymes for aerobic energy production; therefore, low ferritin levels can
impact performance. The level of serum ferritin below which performance
is affected seems to differ among individuals. Physiologists have found that
training and racing performance is frequently impaired when serum ferritin
levels fall below 20 ng/mL, whereas a serum ferritin level between 20 and
40 ng/mL may be low or normal depending on the runner’s individual
physiology (Peeling et al. 2008; Eichner 2012; Burden et al. 2015). A sports
doctor or sports dietitian can provide expert guidance if your iron levels are
borderline or low.
How Much Iron Do You Need?
The U.S. recommended daily intake (RDI) for premenopausal women is 18
milligrams of iron a day, compared to 8 milligrams of iron a day for men
and postmenopausal women. According to the American College of Sports
Medicine’s 2016 “Position Stand on Nutrition and Athletic Performance,”
iron requirements for women athletes may be up to 70 percent higher than
for nonathletes, and distance runners and vegetarian athletes should be
screened regularly and maintain iron intakes higher than the RDI (Thomas,
Erdman, and Burke 2016). Iron requirements haven’t been established for
high-mileage runners, so all that can be said with confidence is that
marathoners need at least the RDI. As with any mineral, too much iron can
be a health hazard. In fact, the typical American man is more likely to get
an iron overload than be iron deficient.
How Can You Prevent Iron Depletion?
As with other running problems such as injuries, the best strategy is to
avoid low iron in the first place. Good food sources of iron include liver,
lean red meat, poultry dark meat, fish, oysters, egg yolk, dark green leafy
vegetables, legumes, dried fruit, lentils, and whole-grain or enriched cereals
and bread. Animal sources of iron contain heme iron, which has an
--- PAGE 82 ---
absorption rate of about 25 to 40 percent, whereas plant sources contain
nonheme iron, which has an absorption rate of up to 10 percent.
The following guidelines can help increase iron absorption to prevent
iron deficiency and iron depletion.
Eat 3 ounces (85 g) of lean red meat or dark poultry at least 3 times
per week.
Don’t drink coffee or tea with meals because they reduce iron
absorption.
Eat or drink foods rich in vitamin C with meals to increase iron
absorption.
Have meals containing both heme iron (from animal sources) and
nonheme iron to increase absorption of the nonheme iron.
Eat iron-enriched bread and breakfast cereals.
Use cast-iron cookware (particularly for acidic foods such as
spaghetti sauce).
Although these recommendations may seem like subtle changes in your
diet, they can have a powerful effect on your iron levels. For example,
you’ll absorb about three times as much iron from your cereal and toast if
you switch from coffee to orange juice with breakfast.
SUPPLEMENTS AND OTHER
POTENTIAL ERGOGENIC AIDS
There are myriad types of nutritional supplements, with more coming on
the market each year. Unfortunately, many are backed by false or
exaggerated claims, and the supplement industry is not well regulated in
most countries, including the United States. In addition to wasting your
money, taking supplements poses a risk of negative side effects. Let’s look
briefly at several major categories of nutritional supplements.
Protein Supplements
As discussed earlier in this chapter, marathoners have higher protein
requirements than sedentary people, but these moderately increased
--- PAGE 83 ---
requirements are easily met by a well-balanced diet. Most runners don’t
need to take protein supplements to meet their needs, but protein shakes and
protein bars can be convenient options for consuming protein after a
workout.
Vitamin and Mineral Supplements
Meeting your baseline need for vitamins and minerals is important for good
health and positive adaptation to training. This is easily accomplished
without supplements for runners who eat a healthy diet. Runners whose
diets may be deficient in certain key vitamins and minerals, however,
should consult with a doctor or an appropriately qualified sports dietitian.
Vegetarians, for instance, often have a difficult time getting enough iron (as
previously discussed), zinc, and vitamin B12 from natural food sources, and
they may also be low in omega-3 fatty acids. In that instance, appropriate
nutritional supplements might prove beneficial to their running and overall
health. More is not better, however, and excessive supplementation with
minerals and fat-soluble vitamins can be toxic.
During the winter, the recommended 600 international units (IU) of
vitamin D can be difficult to obtain through sunlight and diet alone. That’s
especially true if you work a normal schedule and do almost all of your
running in the dark for a few or more months per year. Insufficient vitamin
D levels can suppress your immune system, thereby potentially leading to
catching more colds and generally not recovering from your training as
well. A doctor or dietitian may recommend a vitamin D supplement for
marathoners in this situation.
You also need to be mindful of the ways isolated vitamins and minerals
in supplements may interact with one another, which is another reason we
strongly recommend taking the advice of a doctor or dietitian before
consuming supplements. Trying to time your supplements so they don’t
interfere with one another is a hassle you don’t need. It’s better to just avoid
nutritional deficiencies by eating a well-rounded diet.
Other Nutritional Supplements
This category includes the hundreds of nutritional supplements on the
market claiming to improve various aspects of athletic performance. Among
--- PAGE 84 ---
these, most focus on strength and power performance, but an increasing
array is marketed toward endurance athletes. Decades of experience has
shown that spending your hard-earned cash on miracle cure supplements is
a monumental waste. To run your best, stick with a healthy diet and lifestyle
combined with intelligent training, and stay away from quick fixes claiming
to enhance running performance.
According to the 2018 “IOC Consensus Statement: Dietary Supplements
and the High-Performance Athlete,” which reviewed the evidence behind
hundreds of types of supplements, two potential exceptions in this regard
are caffeine and nitrate (Maughan et al. 2018). We’ve discussed caffeine
elsewhere in this chapter. You may not have heard about nitrate, but you’ve
probably heard about the performance-enhancing promise of beet juice.
Well, beet juice is rich in nitrate. Beet juice is converted to nitrite by the
saliva in your mouth, which then is converted to nitric oxide in your body.
Nitric oxide is said to improve several aspects of endurance physiology,
including blood flow to the working muscles. Some research has found that
after drinking beet juice, athletes’ oxygen consumption is a little lower at a
given workload. In other words, maintaining that pace is a little easier
(Bailey et al. 2009; Jones 2014; Gao et al. 2021).
It’s not yet clear what the best amount of beet root juice is and for how
long it should be taken, or whether the positive effect extends to the
duration of marathon racing and high-level performers. Some runners with
sensitive stomachs also experience digestive issues after taking beet root
juice. Several studies have found that the fitter the subjects, the smaller the
effect. As with almost all nutritional matters, be cautious and don’t look at
beet juice as a quick fix.
MARATHON RACE-DAY NUTRITION
AND HYDRATION
So you’ve followed the advice in this chapter by eating properly and
staying well hydrated throughout your months of preparation. Guess what?
Your work isn’t done yet. Your strategies for taking calories and fluids on
race day can have a strong influence on your marathon performance.
--- PAGE 85 ---
Let’s assume you’ve done a good job of glycogen loading during the
previous several days and you’re well hydrated. Before the race, you want
to take in between 300 and 500 calories of mostly carbohydrate to top off
your glycogen stores. It’s best to ingest these calories 3 to 4 hours before
the race. This shouldn’t be a big deal for races with late starts, such as New
York City or Boston, but for a race such as Chicago, which starts at 7:30
a.m., or Honolulu, which starts at 5:00 a.m. (!), you may have to get up a bit
on the early side, eat something, and then try to doze a while longer. (Good
luck with that on race morning!) You should also take in about a pint (0.5 L)
of fluid to replace fluids lost overnight and ensure that you’re fully
hydrated.
Even if you carefully carbohydrate load for several days leading up to
the marathon, you don’t have much of a buffer against glycogen depletion.
The solution is to take in additional calories during the race.
How much you need to drink during the marathon depends on your body
size, the heat and humidity, and your sweat rate. The target is to replace the
fluid you lose from sweating so you do not lose more than about 3 percent
of your body weight during the marathon. As we will see later, that is a
challenging target to achieve, particularly on a warm day. The maximum
amount you should drink during running is the amount that can empty from
your stomach or the amount required to avoid excessive dehydration from
sweat loss, whichever is less. Drinking more than you have lost brings the
risk of hyponatremia, which is discussed later in this chapter.
Research has shown that runners’ stomachs can typically empty only
about 6 to 7 ounces (177-207 mL) of fluid every 15 minutes during running,
representing about 24 to 28 ounces (710-828 mL) per hour. If you drink
more than that, the extra fluid will just slosh around in your stomach and
not provide any additional benefit. You may be able to handle more or less
than the average, however, so experiment with how much liquid your
stomach will tolerate.
During training, it’s relatively easy to stop and drink as much as you
want whenever you feel like it. All that’s required is a bit of planning and
perhaps a few containers strategically placed before your long run. During
the marathon, however, it’s very difficult to drink 6 to 7 ounces (177-207
mL) of fluid at an aid station without stopping. Marathoners who run
through the aid stations often take in only a few ounces of fluid.
--- PAGE 86 ---
For serious marathoners going for a personal best time, if you drink 4
ounces (118 mL) at 10 drink stops during your marathon, you will have
done a typical job of hydrating. What does taking in 40 ounces (1.18 L) of
fluid during the marathon mean in practice? If you run the marathon in 3
hours and are losing 3 pounds (1.4 kg) per hour, you will lose 9 pounds of
fluid (4.1 kg) and take in 2.6 pounds (1.2 kg), for a net loss of 6.4 pounds
(2.9 kg). If you weigh 150 pounds (68 kg), you will have lost 4.3 percent of
your body weight; this will likely contribute to slowing moderately late in
the race.
Drinking 40 ounces (1.183 L) of an 8 percent solution will supply 95
grams of carbohydrate. Each gram of carbohydrate contains 4.1 calories, so
you’ll be taking in about 390 calories during the race.
A complementary method of taking in carbohydrate during the marathon
or your long runs is to use energy gels. Depending on the brand you choose,
each gel packet typically contains between 80 and 120 calories of
carbohydrate. You should follow most gels with a couple of sips of fluid to
wash them down, and you should take in approximately 4 to 6 ounces (118-
177 mL) of water afterward to help absorb the gel. Some gels, however, are
isotonic (check the label), so you do not need to take in fluid to help with
absorption. The best time to take an energy gel that is not isotonic is shortly
before an aid station.
As always, don’t wait until race day to try an energy gel because it takes
practice to get the water intake right and to feel comfortable running after
taking a gel. You should develop a plan for taking in sports drinks and gels
during your marathon. The makeup of your personal plan will depend on
how warm and humid your marathon is likely to be, how much
carbohydrate you intend to take in during the race, what types of
carbohydrate you are most comfortable taking while running, and what
options are provided by the race. A typical plan for a sub-3-hour marathoner
would be to drink 40 ounces (1,183 mL) of a sports drink with 8 percent
carbohydrates, divided between 10 aid stations, and to take gels providing
100 calories of carbohydrates each at about 40 minutes, 80 minutes, and 2
hours into the marathon. This plan would supply 690 calories of
carbohydrates. During the marathon, a 140-pound (64 kg) runner typically
burns about 100 calories per mile. Of those 100 calories, about 80 are
supplied by carbohydrate. This plan, therefore, supplies enough
--- PAGE 87 ---
carbohydrate fuel to last an extra 8 miles (12-13 km) and substantially
boosts your likelihood of reaching the finish line without running critically
low on glycogen. Slower marathoners can further boost their carbohydrate
intake by taking another gel after about 2 hours and 40 minutes (and after 3
hours and 20 minutes if you’re still going).
There is evidence that just rinsing your mouth with a carbohydrate drink
can enhance performance (Burke and Maughan 2015). The mechanism
seems to be that receptors in the mouth sense the carbohydrate and signal
reward centers in the brain. You can use this strategy as a boost in the last
10 minutes of the marathon when it is too late for carbs to be absorbed in
your intestines.
Avoiding Hyponatremia
If you run the marathon in more than 3 hours on a warm day and drink large
amounts of plain water during the race, you are at risk of hyponatremia.
This is a condition caused by unusually low sodium levels in your blood; a
large proportion of your body fluid is replaced with water, thereby reducing
your body’s sodium content. There is evidence that women have a
moderately higher risk of developing hyponatremia than do men. The
symptoms of hyponatremia include weakness, nausea, disorientation,
bloating, dizziness, and in extreme cases, seizures and coma. Hyponatremia
typically occurs only toward the end of ultramarathons or Ironman
triathlons, but it can occur in the marathon on warm days, especially for 4-
hour-plus marathoners who consume only water. The simple way to avoid
hyponatremia during a hot-weather marathon is to consume fluids
containing at least 250 milligrams of sodium per liter and to not drink more
than you have lost as sweat.
How to Drink on the Run
The race nutrition plan described above assumes you’re regularly taking in
a good amount of fluid, as opposed to most of it spilling down your front.
Practice drinking while running at close to marathon race pace until you get
good at it. It makes sense to slow a bit at the aid stations, but if you’re
competitive, you won’t want to lose time to the runners around you. By
--- PAGE 88 ---
practicing drinking on the run, you can greatly improve your proficiency at
this skill.
If you’re an elite runner, you can usually arrange to have squeeze bottles
at the aid stations along the course. This is optimal but obviously not readily
available to everyone. Non-elites can help themselves by choosing
marathons where friends or family members can meet them regularly along
the way and give them bottles. A growing number of competitive
marathoners also take advantage of small, flexible bottles that conform to
your grip and can be carried for several miles without significantly affecting
your arm carriage.
Still, the majority of marathoners must master the paper cup. A
convenient way to practice drinking from cups is the round-and-round-the-
track method—simply set up some cups at the local track and practice
drinking every couple of laps. The advantage of the track is convenience.
The disadvantage is that, if you’re running intervals, you’ll be breathing so
hard that you’ll get to experience the dubious thrill of getting water up your
nose. This approach works really well during a tempo run. If you do a 20-
to 30-minute tempo run on the track and take a drink every two to three
laps, you will quickly improve your drinking-while-running technique.
Race-Day Technique
If volunteers are handing out fluids during the race, try to make eye contact
with one and point at the cup so that you don’t surprise them. (If the cups
are on a table, eye contact with the cup generally won’t help.) If volunteers
are offering both water and a sports drink, call out your preference as you
approach the aid station so that the right volunteer hands you a cup.
Slow slightly and try to move your arm back while you grab the cup so
that you don’t hit the cup with your full running speed. Squeeze the top of
the cup closed so that all of the liquid doesn’t slosh out, and take a swig.
This will help prevent fluid from going up your nose when you tip the cup
up to drink. The trick is to breathe normally. Always take a couple of
normal breaths between swigs. When you’re done drinking, accelerate back
to race pace.
Unless you’re an elite marathoner, the best strategy on a warm and
humid day is most likely to stop and drink at the aid stations. Marathons
--- PAGE 89 ---
typically offer aid stations about every two miles, although some larger
races have up to 20 stops. Let’s say that, from the start, you stop to drink
every 2 miles. That’s 12 stops between the start and finish. If you spend 10
seconds drinking at each stop, you’ll add 2 minutes to your time. If you run
through the stops while drinking, you’ll slow a little anyway, so stopping
isn’t going to add much time, and stopping helps ensure that you take in
enough fluid to fight off dehydration. On a warm day, an extra 2 minutes at
the water stations can repay you with 10 to 20 minutes gained by the finish
of the marathon.
What and when you eat and drink play an important role in how you
adapt to training for a marathon. As we’ve seen, neglecting proper nutrition
and hydration will mean not reaping the full benefits of your hard work.
The same is true for not paying attention to easy days and other aspects of
managing recovery from taxing training. Let’s look at what to do to
maximize your chance of marathon success during the many hours each
week when you’re not running long or hard.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 90 ---
A
3
BALANCING TRAINING AND
RECOVERY
Description
s we saw in chapter 1, every time you do a hard workout, you
provide a stimulus for your body to improve in some way, such as
your lactate threshold (LT), fat-burning ability, V O2max, and so on.
--- PAGE 91 ---
Any one workout, though, provides only a mild stimulus for improvement;
it’s the sum of your workouts over time that determines the total stimulus to
improve a specific component of your fitness. For example, if you do one
tempo run in the few months before your marathon, you provide a mild
stimulus for your LT to improve. If you do six tempo runs in 8 weeks, you
provide a strong repetitive stimulus for your LT to improve.
The training stimulus, however, is only half of the formula for
performance improvement. To improve, your body must recover from
training and adapt to a higher level. By learning to manage your recovery,
you’ll optimize your training. If you manage your recovery so that you can
do hard workouts more frequently or so that the quality of your hard
workouts consistently improves, you’ll provide a greater stimulus for your
body to improve its capacities.
Recovery from training is important, both from day to day and over the
course of your marathon-preparation program. Poor management of your
recovery can lead to overtraining, which simply overwhelms your body’s
ability to respond positively to training. In this chapter, we’ll review how to
optimize your recovery for marathon success.
RECOVERY AND
SUPERCOMPENSATION
One of the realities of running is that if you do a hard workout today, you
won’t be a better marathoner tomorrow. In fact, tomorrow you’ll just be
tired. Hard training causes immediate fatigue, tissue breakdown,
dehydration, and glycogen depletion. Depending on the difficulty of the
training session (and other factors discussed in this chapter), you’ll require
from 3 to 10 days to completely recover from a serious workout.
At some point, however, the fatigue of each workout dissipates and you
adapt to a higher level. To optimize your training, you need to find the
correct balance between training and recovery. Training provides the
stimulus for your body to adapt, but recovery is when you allow your body
to adapt and improve. Well-designed training sessions provide a stimulus
for your body to adapt to a higher level, which is called supercompensation.
Effectively managing your recovery means answering two questions:
--- PAGE 92 ---
1. After how many days do you reap the benefits of a workout?
2. How much time should you allow between hard workouts or between
a hard workout and a race?
The training schedules in the second half of this book reflect the answers
to those questions. The schedules aim to provide the ideal amount of
stimulus and recovery so your fitness improves week by week as your
marathon approaches. Let’s look at the answers to the above questions to
understand why the schedules are structured as they are.
Turning Genes On and Off
The intensity, duration, and frequency (number of sessions per week) of
your training all influence the stress of your training and the rate at which
your body adapts. The adaptations in hormone levels, fat-burning ability,
capillary density, and so on that result from endurance training occur
because of repeated training bouts rather than as a result of one workout in
isolation. It’s as though your body must be convinced that you’re really
serious about training before it makes the physiological adaptations that let
you reach a new level.
The process of adaptation begins with your genes. Training provides
stimuli (e.g., glycogen depletion) that turn specific genes on or off. By
altering the expression of genes, training changes the rates at which your
body makes and breaks down specific proteins. For example, endurance
training turns on genes for the production of mitochondrial protein. More
endurance training leads to more mitochondria in your muscles so you can
produce more energy aerobically. Your muscles and cardiovascular system
adapt over days, weeks, and months to the cumulative effects of your
repeated training.
Factors Affecting Recovery Rate
Runners vary greatly in how long it takes to recover from and adapt to a
workout. Differences among runners in recovery time and rate of
improvement are determined by genetics, age (you tend to recover more
slowly with age), training history, sex (females tend to recover more slowly
because of lower testosterone levels), and lifestyle factors. Your genetics
--- PAGE 93 ---
determine your predisposition to adapt to endurance training; some of us are
programmed to adapt more quickly than others. Lifestyle factors such as
diet, quantity and quality of sleep, general health, and various life stressors
(such as work, finances, and relationships) all influence how quickly you
recover from and adapt to training. Because so much variation exists among
runners in how many workouts they can tolerate in a given period, you
shouldn’t copy your training partner’s running program. Only through
experience will you learn how much training you can handle.
Over time you will learn how much training your body can positively
adapt to in a given time. Successful marathon preparation requires that you
go through this self-discovery process intelligently and systematically.
Determining this balance is tricky because it can be hard to isolate
variables. For example, if your job is now much more stressful than the last
time you trained for a marathon, your current rate of recovery might be
slower. Or, as we’ll see in detail in chapter 5, you’ll probably find you don’t
recover as quickly as you used to if you’re a middle-aged runner training
for your first marathon in a decade. You must find the correct balance of
training stimulus and recovery for your specific circumstances over the long
weeks that constitute marathon training.
Time Required for Recovery and
Supercompensation
Unfortunately, the scientific literature doesn’t provide clear evidence of the
amount of time required to realize the benefits of an individual training
session. Personal experience and discussions with many runners and
coaches indicate that 8 to 10 days is an adequate amount of time to recover
from and reap the rewards of most hard training sessions. Given that any
one workout provides only a small fitness benefit but that a workout can
cause severe short-term fatigue, it’s wise to err on the side of caution and
allow enough time to fully recover from training before a race. For the
marathon race itself, complete recovery from training is critical for success.
Marathon tapering generally requires a full 3 weeks (tapering is the subject
of chapter 6).
Table 3.1 shows typical times to recover from three major types of
workouts. The third column indicates typical amounts of time to recover
--- PAGE 94 ---
from a workout of each type. For example, the table indicates that you
should allow at least 4 days between tempo runs or between a tempo run
and a tune-up race. You don’t, however, need to allow 4 days between a
tempo run and a long run or interval workout. That’s because each type of
workout uses different combinations of energy systems, so complete
recovery from one type of workout isn’t necessary before you do another
type of workout.
Table 3.1 Minimum Time Between Hard
Workouts and Tune-Up Races
Type of
workout Sample workout
Days before tune-up race or next similar
workout
Tempo run 25-30 minutes at LT
pace
4
Long run 17-20 miles (27-32 km)4
V O2max
intervals
6 × 1,000 m at 5K race
pace
5
Although you won’t see the benefits of this week’s workout in this
weekend’s race, if you do the workout early enough in the week, you should
recover sufficiently for it not to have a detrimental effect on your race
performance. The timelines in table 3.1 take into account the fact that we
often do a tune-up race when the fatigue of previous training is reduced
rather than when supercompensation has occurred. You generally can’t
afford the time required to be optimally rested for tune-up races. During
marathon preparation, you should allow only enough rest and recovery to
obtain optimal results for the marathon itself and possibly for one tune-up
race to provide an accurate indication of your fitness.
Of the major types of workouts, tempo runs are the easiest to recover
from because they don’t break down the body as much as the other forms of
hard training. Tempo runs are neither fast nor long enough to cause
substantial muscle damage or to totally deplete your muscles of glycogen.
Long runs seem to cause the most variability in recovery time among
runners, although replenishing glycogen stores generally requires only 24 to
--- PAGE 95 ---
48 hours. Some runners are able to recover relatively quickly from long
runs, whereas others are wiped out for a few days. The variability in
recovery time depends on your training history, the genetic and lifestyle
factors discussed earlier, the type of courses you train on (downhills cause
more muscle damage and require greater recovery time), and the weather
(the same long run in 85 degrees F [29 degrees C] will take longer to
recover from than one in 50 degrees F [10 degrees C]).
Interval workouts put your muscles and cardiovascular system under the
most stress and generally require the longest recovery time. Later in this
chapter, we’ll discuss strategies you can use to speed your recovery.
Regardless of the type of workout involved, the pattern of workout and
recovery is basic to effective training. Generally known as the hard/easy
principle, this dictates the structure of your training over the weeks and
months leading up to the marathon. Let’s investigate the rationale for
following the hard/easy principle.
THE HARD/EASY PRINCIPLE
The hard/easy principle of training remains the best approach for improving
marathon performance. But hard/easy training doesn’t necessarily mean
never having back-to-back hard days. Instead, a better interpretation is that
1 or more hard days should be followed by 1 or more recovery days. A
recovery day may consist of an easy run, a light cross-training session, or
total rest. On page 63, we’ll look at three situations in which back-to-back
hard training days are followed by back-to-back recovery days.
The overriding reason to follow the hard/easy principle is to provide the
optimal balance of training stimulus and recovery so your fitness improves
during the course of your marathon preparation. Three additional reasons to
follow the hard/easy principle are to allow replenishment of glycogen
stores, to prevent illness, and to minimize the effects of delayed-onset
muscle soreness (DOMS). We’ll look at each reason below.
Replenishing Glycogen Stores    As discussed in chapter 2, your body can
store only a limited amount of glycogen, and it takes about 24 to 48 hours
to completely replenish your glycogen stores. So, when you do two hard
workouts in a row, you risk going into the second workout with partially
--- PAGE 96 ---
filled glycogen stores, becoming depleted, and having a bad workout.
Although glycogen depletion is potentially a problem on the second hard
day, with a bit of planning, it’s not an insurmountable problem. Three hard
days in a row, however, would very likely lead to glycogen depletion and a
more prolonged recovery period. By following the hard/easy principle, you
give your body time to build up your glycogen stores so you are prepared
for the next hard workout.
Preventing Illness    Moderate training makes your immune system
stronger. Various studies have found that people who get regular exercise
have fewer colds than do sedentary folks. After high-intensity and
prolonged exercise, however, the immune system is temporarily suppressed,
creating an open window during which you’re at increased risk of infection.
Although immune function varies greatly among individuals, studies
indicate that the immune systems of healthy, well-trained runners are
typically suppressed only after particularly hard training sessions. This
could include marathon pace runs, big V O2max workouts, tune-up races,
and your longest endurance runs.
As with other aspects of training, the combination of running intensity
and duration that leads to a dip in immune function is highly individualized
and related to your overall health—and whether you have been stringing
together too many hard training sessions in a row (discussed in the section
“Understanding Overtraining” later in this chapter). Large and sudden
increases in training intensity or volume can lower resistance to infection, a
fact that reinforces the message in chapter 1 and the training schedules to
make changes in training load incrementally and gradually.
Immune system suppression after high-intensity running has been found
to last from as little as 3 hours up to about 72 hours. Interestingly, there is
evidence that some components of immune system suppression are linked
to carbohydrate depletion. This evidence suggests that taking in
carbohydrate during the workout and restocking carbohydrate quickly may
reduce immune suppression and help restore your immune function to full
strength in less time. The clear implication is to not do another hard training
session until your immune function recovers from the previous hard session
or race.
--- PAGE 97 ---
If you have a healthy, well-balanced diet, you are probably getting all of
the vitamins and minerals you need for a well-functioning immune system.
Runners with diets that do not provide enough protein, iron, zinc,
magnesium, or vitamins A, E, B6, B12, and folic acid, however, may have
weakened immune systems. As discussed in chapter 2, the best way to get
the vitamins and minerals you need is to eat plenty of fruits and vegetables.
Avoid supplements with megadoses of vitamins and minerals, which can
have a negative effect on your immune system.
Minimizing the Effects of DOMS    Contrary to many runners’ beliefs,
high levels of lactate (lactic acid) in your muscles aren’t what make you
sore for several days after a hard effort. Essentially, all the lactate you
produce in a race or workout is eliminated from your body in less than an
hour. DOMS is caused by microscopic muscle damage that occurs primarily
from eccentric (lengthening) muscle contractions, such as when you run
downhill. During downhill running, your quadriceps muscles contract
eccentrically to resist the pull of gravity and keep your knees from
buckling. The resulting muscle damage leads to inflammation, which causes
soreness. It takes 1 to 2 days for this process of muscle damage,
inflammation, and pain to reach a peak, and the effects can last for up to 5
days. While you’re experiencing DOMS, your muscles need time to repair.
The damaged muscles are also weaker, so any workout done before the
soreness goes away not only will be painful but also will likely not be
intense enough to improve your marathon fitness.
The physiology of DOMS favors an approach of 2 hard days followed by
2 easy days because it takes 1 to 2 days for DOMS to kick in, then it takes
another couple of days for the soreness to dissipate. By doing back-to-back
hard days, you may sneak in your second workout before soreness and
muscle weakness develop. You would then have at least 2 days to recover
before the next hard effort.
When to Do Back-to-Back Hard Days
We’ve seen several reasons why you should follow the hard/easy principle
in your training and that a hard day doesn’t always have to be followed by
an easy day. A pattern of 2 hard days in a row followed by 2 (or more)
recovery days may actually allow you to handle and recover from more
--- PAGE 98 ---
high-quality training. Let’s look at three specific situations in which back-
to-back hard days may be the best approach.
During weeks that you race, you need to train but also rest for the race.
Renowned exercise physiologist and coach Jack Daniels, PhD, recommends
back-to-back hard days during race weeks rather than alternating hard and
easy days.
For example, say you’re following a strict hard/easy schedule and have a
race on Saturday. If you did a long run on the previous Sunday, then you
would run hard Tuesday and Thursday and easy on the other days. Doing a
hard session on Thursday, however, doesn’t make sense because you would
still be tired from that effort for Saturday’s race. If, however, you do a hard
workout on Tuesday and a medium-long run on Wednesday, you would still
get your harder sessions in but would have an extra day to recover for the
race. Although this modification still doesn’t provide the optimal amount of
time to recover for Saturday’s race, it’s an intelligent compromise that
allows you to get your high-quality training while also racing reasonably
well.
Another time when you might do 2 hard days in a row is if your weekly
schedule is dictated by the Monday-to-Friday workweek. If you’re too busy
or fatigued during the week to get in regular high-quality training, you’ll
want to take advantage of the weekend and squeeze in 2 hard days. Hard
days on Saturday and Sunday followed by recovery days on Monday and
Tuesday provide a strong training stimulus and 2 full days to recover before
the next hard effort on Wednesday.
This brings us to the time-honored tradition of racing on Saturday and
doing your long run on Sunday. If you race 10K or less, you’ll dip into your
carbohydrate stores but (assuming that, like most runners, you generally eat
a lot of carbohydrate) will most likely not come close to fully depleting
your glycogen stores. By eating your normal high-carbohydrate diet, you’ll
be reasonably topped up with glycogen and ready to handle your long run
on Sunday morning. You can also take a couple of gels to provide
carbohydrates during your long run, which should be at a more relaxed
pace.
Similar to the first example of back-to-back harder efforts, a V O2max
workout or tempo run in the middle of the week can be followed by a
--- PAGE 99 ---
medium-long run the following day. The medium-long run is the least
stressful of the various types of hard workouts and can also be done on the
easier (or slightly shorter) side if you are really tired from the previous
day’s effort.
In the training schedules in this book, several weeks prescribe a long run
on Sunday, a recovery day on Monday, a long interval session on Tuesday,
and a medium-long run on Wednesday. That is a tough 4-day combination,
and many runners find it the most challenging aspect of these training
schedules. The back-to-back hard days on Tuesday and Wednesday require
that 2 of the next 3 days are easy. Not everyone successfully adapts to this
sequence of workouts, and we discuss several ways to adjust the schedules
in chapter 8, but paying attention to your recovery will provide the greatest
likelihood of adapting positively and taking your marathon performance to
the next level.
DRIVING TO RUN
There are several common training scenarios—meeting others to
run, going to the track, indulging in a trail run—that involve
driving before and after your run. If your drive is 10 or more
minutes, incorporating these practices can help with your
recovery from the run.
Stretch, then stretch again. Do your normal prerun
stretching at home. When you get to your destination, do
some dynamic movements, such as leg swings and knees
to chest, to undo the stiffness that driving can induce. If
you’re meeting others, arrive a few minutes early so you
have time for these exercises.
And stretch some more. Before driving home, do some
gentle static stretching for your hips, glutes, hamstrings,
shoulders, and any other areas that tend to get tight when
you drive. The cat-cow yoga pose is especially helpful at
this time. If there’s room and you have time, bring a mat or
--- PAGE 100 ---
at least a towel to stretch on, which should increase the
odds you’ll spend a few minutes stretching.
Rehydrate and refuel. Bring a full water bottle and commit
to finishing it before you get home. If your drive is longer
than 30 minutes or you’ve done a long run or another
glycogen-draining session, have some solid or liquid
carbohydrates available.
Bring extra clothing. In colder weather, bring a dry shirt or
more to change into before driving home. A fresh hat will
also help you stay dry and warm while your immune system
might be temporarily suppressed.
And then stretch one more time. When you get home,
spend at least a few minutes on more static stretching. The
cat-cow yoga pose will help loosen your pelvic region,
which tends to feel locked up when you drive soon after
running.
If Saturday’s race is longer than 15K (9 miles), you’ll likely be tired and
sore, have depleted glycogen stores, and find yourself at less than your best
for Sunday’s long run. In that situation, skip the long run on Sunday. You’ll
be better off postponing your long run until you’ve recovered from the race.
So far, we’ve considered only the pattern of hard training and recovery
within a week. Just as important is the pattern of hard efforts and recovery
over the course of your marathon preparation. Week after week of hard
training can eventually lead to staleness (or more technically “nonfunctional
overreaching,” which is discussed later in this chapter) or overtraining. To
adapt optimally, it’s best to have several hard training weeks followed by a
recovery week. The training schedules in this book regularly incorporate
recovery weeks.
There are several patterns you can follow. The correct pattern for you
depends on how hard you’re training, your body’s ability to adapt to
training, and the sum of other stressors in your life. The most commonly
used pattern is 3 hard weeks followed by a recovery week. During the early
buildup phase of marathon preparation, runners can often handle 4 or 5
--- PAGE 101 ---
weeks during which mileage is increasing followed by 1 recovery week. In
other cases, 2 hard weeks followed by 1 recovery week is optimal. Again,
through trial and error, you’ll find the pattern that’s best for you and adjust
the training programs accordingly.
CONSECUTIVE HARD SESSIONS OF
THE WRONG KIND
An old approach is to do several hard days in a row to get used
to running on tired legs. Does this idea make sense?
As we’ve seen, the best way to prepare for marathon
conditions is to do high-quality long runs and tempo runs. If you
run a 22-miler (35 km) at 40 seconds per mile slower than goal
marathon pace, starting relatively fresh, you’ll provide a more
specific stimulus to improve your marathon performance than if
you start the run fatigued and struggle to run 2 minutes per mile
slower than goal marathon pace. At least once every 3 weeks,
give yourself the chance to do your long run fresh. You’ll feel
great on these runs, thereby leading not only to a better effort but
also providing positive psychological reinforcement.
Doing an interval session or tempo run on tired legs makes no
sense whatsoever. The objective of interval training (e.g., 6 ×
1,000 m at 5K race pace) is to improve your maximal oxygen
consumption. The objective of tempo runs (e.g., 5 miles at LT
pace) is to improve your LT. If you run these workouts while tired,
you’ll either do them more slowly than is optimal or you’ll have to
cut back the volume of the workout (e.g., do fewer intervals or a
shorter tempo run). In either case, you’ll provide less of a
stimulus to improve than if you had started the workout relatively
fresh.
The recovery weeks in these training schedules include about 80 percent
as much training volume as the hard training weeks. For example, if your
hard weeks consist of 60 miles (97 km), you would run about 48 miles (77
--- PAGE 102 ---
km) during your recovery week. The schedules also reduce the quantity and
the intensity of the hard sessions during recovery weeks. For example, the
distance of long runs is reduced as well as the pace per mile, and there are
no hard V O2max sessions scheduled during a recovery week. The total
training load (taking into account volume and intensity) is reduced by about
30 percent.
RECOVERY DAYS (OR EASY DAYS)
So far in this chapter, we’ve discussed the necessity of incorporating
recovery into your training schedule. Following the hard/easy principle, 1
or 2 hard days are always followed by 1 or more easy days. Easy training
days are more appropriately called recovery days because their purpose is to
allow you to recover for your next hard effort.
So what constitutes a recovery day? As with most aspects of running, the
answer depends on your physiology and training history. Recovery days
should be less difficult than hard sessions in the volume (distance) and
intensity of training. In some cases, a recovery day should be a day of rest
or a day of low-intensity cross-training.
The most common training mistake marathon runners make is training
too hard on recovery days. If you train too hard on a scheduled recovery
day, you’ll be tired for your next hard day, and that workout won’t go as
well as planned. If you’re like most runners, you’ll be upset, and then you’ll
run your next scheduled recovery day a bit harder. So begins a vicious cycle
in which your recovery days are done too hard and the quality of your hard
days declines, resulting in mediocre performances in training and racing.
Just as it takes discipline to push through a tempo run when you feel bad, it
takes discipline to train easily when you feel good on a planned recovery
day.
The other mistake that marathoners often make is trying to squeeze in
too much distance on recovery days. Early in your training program, when
the marathon is still more than 8 weeks away, it probably doesn’t hurt to
add a couple of extra miles to recovery days. When you’re into the last 8
weeks of training, however, you have more hard sessions with specific
purposes and are training at full capacity. If you go into your hard days tired
--- PAGE 103 ---
from too many slow miles on your recovery days, your overall progress will
be compromised.
Your recovery days shouldn’t impose additional training stress on your
muscles or your nervous system. You should try, therefore, to minimize the
pounding on your legs on those days. Running on soft surfaces on your
recovery days will reduce the cumulative impact your legs, hips, and back
experience over the course of the week. When you consider that your
recovery days occur when you’re the most tired and when your muscles are
the most fatigued and least resilient, it makes sense to take it easy on your
muscles on those days. This also implies avoiding hill running on your
recovery days, not only because running uphill is likely to require more
effort than is optimal for an easy day but also because downhill running
tends to induce muscle damage, and you certainly don’t want to incur
additional muscle damage on a recovery day.
Monitoring your heart rate is a good way to prevent yourself from
training too hard on your recovery days. (See chapters 1 and 8 for
information about training by heart rate.) If you keep your heart rate below
about 75 percent of your maximal heart rate, or 66 percent of your heart rate
reserve plus your resting heart rate, you’ll let your body recover to allow
high-quality workouts on your hard training days.
For example, say your resting heart rate is 50 beats per minute and your
maximal heart rate is 185 beats per minute. If you train by maximal heart
rate, you would want to keep your heart rate below 139 (185 × 0.75) on
your recovery days. Heart rate reserve is your maximal heart rate minus
your resting pulse. In this example, then, your heart rate reserve is 135.
Using this more precise calculation also indicates you would keep your
heart rate below 139 (resting heart rate of 50 + [135 × 0.66]) on your
recovery days.
The lower-tech way to determine your appropriate recovery training
intensity is to run approximately 2 minutes per mile (75 sec/km) slower
than your 10-mile (16 km) to half marathon race pace. For example, if you
run the half marathon in 1:20, or just over 6 minutes per mile (3:45 per km),
your recovery runs should be done at roughly an 8-minute-per-mile (5
min/km) pace.
That said, it’s important not to obsess about hitting a certain pace on
your recovery days. Smartwatches are useful tools for much of marathon
--- PAGE 104 ---
training, but they can be an impediment to running your recovery days at
the right effort level. Many runners have an arbitrary pace that they think is
too slow to count as real running for them. Rather than letting their bodies
dictate the pace on their recovery days, they check their smartwatch
throughout the run and make sure they’re running faster than their self-
prescribed too-slow pace. Worrying about how your run will look on Strava,
Instagram, or elsewhere online compounds the problem.
Doing so is a mistake. That too-slow pace is often some figure that has
no meaning to the human body, such as 9 minutes per mile or 5 minutes 30
seconds per kilometer. Also, having a rigid too-slow pace ignores that
there’s greater day-to-day variability in your recovery pace than there is in
something like your 5K race pace or LT pace. Ensuring that you’re faster
than your too-slow pace works against the purpose of the day’s training,
which is to recover from your previous hard work so you’re ready to put out
a good effort on the workouts that really advance your fitness, such as long
runs, tempo runs, and intervals.
The better approach on recovery days is to run at an effort level that feels
comfortable for the entirety of your run and only check your watch to make
sure you’re not going too hard. American and European runners who have
trained in Kenya marvel at the relaxed pace some of the world’s best
marathoners hit on their recovery days. Aim to feel like you’re storing up
energy rather than slowly leaking it. Running close to your normal cadence
will make the run feel more normal. It’s likely that over the course you’ll
get faster, but don’t force that to happen. Ideally, you’ll finish your recovery
runs wishing you could tag on another few miles and feeling eager for the
next day’s training.
In some situations, cross-training is the best type of exercise on recovery
days. For marathoners who come out of Sunday long runs feeling beat-up,
cross-training is the safest option for training on Monday. Elliptical
training, arc training, cycling, deep-water running, and swimming are all
great options. Your recovery is enhanced by the increased blood flow, but
there’s no additional pounding on your legs, hips, and back. Cross-training
is discussed in chapter 4.
--- PAGE 105 ---
RECOVERY CONSIDERATIONS IN
THE REAL WORLD
If you follow the day-to-day lives of elite marathoners, you’ll soon
notice how much importance they place on recovery in the hours
between runs. Most of them don’t have jobs outside of running
and can therefore be meticulous in these matters. In the likely
scenario that you fit in your running around an unrelated job,
here’s how to maximize your recovery while at work.
Hydration. Always have a water bottle at hand and commit
to draining it a couple of times a day.
Calories. In an office, keep healthful foods with you so that
you can graze throughout the day as opposed to getting so
famished that you hit the vending machines in desperation.
If you’re working from home, have similar snacks ready.
Posture, part 1. Make sure your computer screen is at eye
level and not too far away so that you don’t sit with your
head tilted and thrust forward all day.
Posture, part 2. Even if your computer is set up ideally, it’s
still easy to sit with a slumped upper body when you’re at a
desk all day. Sit with your head, shoulders, and hips aligned
and with a slight curve in your lower back. Good posture at
work translates into fewer biomechanical woes on the run. If
you do some or all of your work from home, work from a
dedicated office space, if possible, instead of slumped on a
sofa.
Move. Get up and walk around at least once an hour to
lessen the strain on your lower back and hamstrings. This
should be easy to do if you work remotely. But if necessary,
set a timer so that you don’t find yourself having spent the
entire morning in a comfortable living room chair.
--- PAGE 106 ---
AVOIDING OVERTRAINING
Overtraining is a danger for any motivated marathoner. In striving to
improve your performance, you progressively increase the volume and
intensity of your training. At some point, you hit your individual training
threshold. When you exceed that threshold, positive adaptation stops,
negative adaptation occurs, and your performances in training and racing
suffer.
Individual training thresholds vary greatly among runners. Many elite
marathoners handle repeated 120-mile (193 km) weeks, whereas some
runners struggle to maintain 40-mile (64 km) weeks. Similarly, some
runners can handle more hard days of training in a week than others. Your
individual training threshold also changes with time. The elites now running
120-mile weeks couldn’t always handle such big mileage, but they
increased their mileage as their capacity to withstand the stress increased. A
detailed training log will help you discern your limits and how they evolve
throughout your running career. Software that monitors your training and
recovery and enables tracking your development over time is discussed
later in this chapter.
Understanding Overtraining
It’s important to clarify what overtraining is and isn’t. Fatigue for a few
days after a hard training session isn’t overtraining. In fact, it’s a necessary
step in the process of recovery and development. When training stress is
applied in the appropriate dosage, you improve at the optimal rate. If your
training stress is above the optimal level, you may still improve, but you’ll
do so at a slower rate. True overtraining occurs only above a higher
threshold (your individual training threshold) for a prolonged period and
can lead to overtraining syndrome.
What’s much more common than overtraining syndrome is overreaching.
Overreaching occurs when you repeatedly string together too many days of
hard training. There are two categories of overreaching: first, short-term
overreaching, in which a period of higher-intensity or higher-volume
training leads to fatigue and a short-term decrease in performance, after
which you bounce back after a week or so of recovery; and second,
--- PAGE 107 ---
“nonfunctional” or extreme overreaching, in which more prolonged higher-
intensity or higher-volume training leads to longer-lasting fatigue and
decreased performance for several weeks or even months (Meeusen et al.
2013). Other factors, including a lack of sleep, psychological and emotional
stress, restricted caloric intake or carbohydrate intake, low iron levels,
dehydration, work stress, and environmental stress, can contribute to both
types of overreaching as well as overtraining syndrome.
Repeated extreme overreaching eventually leads to overtraining
syndrome. The simple explanation for overtraining syndrome is that the
combination of training load and other life stressors is greater than the
body’s ability to recover and adapt positively for a prolonged period of
time. As would be expected, the combination of contributing factors and
threshold for overtraining syndrome varies greatly among runners.
Nonfunctional overreaching and overtraining syndrome are caused by
poor planning and not heeding your body’s feedback. Depending on the
severity and duration of the imbalance, changes in the neuroendocrine
system due to prolonged overtraining often require many months to return
to normal levels.
Rather than just training too hard, overreaching and overtraining appear
to be related to both the difficulty of training (the training load) and the
monotony of training. Monotony of training is a lack of variation in the
difficulty of training from day to day. Monotonous training typically
consists of one moderately hard day after another, whereas varied training
consists of a mix of hard days, easy days, and the occasional rest day.
The most effective training schedules find the right balance of several
types of hard training and easier recovery days or rest days for optimal
improvement without breaking down. Again, a good training log can help
you here. Software-based training and recovery trackers provide a variety of
metrics and analyses that can provide insight into how you are adapting to
your training and allow you to easily compare your current marathon
preparation to your training and recovery from previous marathons. If you
improve your awareness of the training load and monotony that puts you
over the edge, you can try to adjust these elements for optimal training and
marathon performance.
--- PAGE 108 ---
Breaking Out of Overreaching and
Overtraining Syndrome
If you have more than two weeks during which your energy levels are down
and you feel like you are not progressing, it pays to consider whether you
need to back off for a couple of weeks to get your training back on track.
Given the typical runner’s mentality to train through adversity, this can be
difficult to assess (even with some objective data). You are training hard
and have various other stresses in your life, and you will invariably have
times when you are more tired than usual.
In most cases, two to three easier weeks will allow your body to recover
so you are once again adapting positively to training. Reducing training
intensity—so that you’re doing only easy aerobic running—has the largest
effect on recovering from extreme overreaching and overtraining syndrome.
During marathon preparation, this would include temporarily skipping
V O2max training, lactate threshold training, and marathon-pace runs.
To enhance recovery, you should also reduce your training volume. The
correct amount to reduce your training volume depends on your individual
circumstances and how deeply entrenched in overtraining or overreaching
you’ve become. As a rule of thumb, reducing your mileage by 40 percent
should be enough to allow your body to recover. In addition, if you’ve been
training twice a day, it will be necessary to reduce to 1 training session a
day. Your body needs time to recover, and a second workout will slow your
progress. It’s also helpful to have at least 1 day a week completely off from
training.
Two to three weeks of training with reduced intensity and decreased
mileage are not a disaster for your marathon preparation. After all, it’s rare
to tick all of the boxes in the many weeks leading up to the marathon.
If you have regained your usual energy level by the third week, you can
reintroduce V O2max training and lactate threshold training. Do the
workouts listed in the training program you’re following, but run those
workouts a few seconds slower per mile than you otherwise would have.
Similarly, you can increase your mileage back to close to the level
prescribed in the training schedules, but hold back about 10 to 15 percent
for the first transition week. During the second transition week just hold
--- PAGE 109 ---
back a few percent from the full workload called for in the training
schedules. Depending on how long you felt overtired, how long you backed
off, and how many weeks are left before your marathon, you may need to
adjust your marathon race goal, but you can make that decision closer to
race day.
Other strategies to recover from overreaching and overtraining syndrome
include ensuring adequate quality and quantity of sleep and consuming a
high-quality diet. Key dietary factors include consuming enough calories to
meet the energy demands of training (see discussion of RED-S below) and
consuming enough carbohydrates to support training and immune function.
If you have low energy levels and have responded poorly to training for
several weeks for no obvious reason, then your training stress and other life
stressors may have led to extreme overreaching or overtraining syndrome.
If you haven’t already, the first step is to back off your training as discussed
above. If you don’t see improvement after a few weeks, see a sports
physician to check whether your symptoms are caused by an illness. The
possibility always exists that excessive fatigue is caused by something other
than running. Ask to have your red blood cell count, hemoglobin, and
ferritin levels checked to see whether your iron levels are normal (as
discussed in chapter 2). If you reach this point, it’s probably best to either
significantly change your goal for the marathon you’ve been training for or
give up that marathon entirely. What matters most is regaining your normal
vigor and ability to adapt to training.
In some cases, a reduction in running performance is due to a prolonged
imbalance between calories consumed and calories used. Termed relative
energy deficiency in sport (RED-S), energy intake is less than energy
expenditure and eventually leads to impaired health and performance. When
you have a caloric deficit for a prolonged period in combination with hard
training, your body responds to protect you. In this situation, body weight
may stay the same or only slightly decrease because your metabolic rate
drops as your body attempts to adjust to fewer calories. In female athletes,
an imbalance in energy availability can lead to the female athlete triad,
which includes low energy availability, an absence of or infrequent
menstrual periods, and low bone mineral density. These conditions are
interrelated, and highly committed athletes in sports such as distance
running, in which leanness may be associated with performance, are at risk.
--- PAGE 110 ---
The triad usually starts with restricting dietary intake, sometimes including
disordered eating, while running high mileage, leading to less estrogen
production and irregular menstrual periods. This leads to reduced bone
mineral density, an increased risk of stress fractures, and other injuries.
Running performance declines as the triad progresses, but the risks to long-
term health are more important. Breaking out of RED-S and the female
athlete triad requires increased caloric and nutrient intake, reduced training,
and other lifestyle changes, and it often involves the support of a sports
physician, a sports nutritionist, and a psychologist (Mountjoy et al. 2023).
Conner Mantz & Clayton Young
Fastest marathon: 2:05:08 (Mantz, Boston, 2025); 2:07:04
(Young, Boston, 2025)
Marathon highlights: (Mantz) first in the 2024 U.S. Olympic
Trials; (Mantz) eighth in the 2024 Olympics; (Young) second
in the 2024 U.S. Olympic Trials; (Young) ninth in the 2024
Olympics
We’ve taken the unusual step of a joint profile for Conner Mantz
and Clayton Young to emphasize the value of a good training
partner.
--- PAGE 111 ---
Description
They began training together regularly in 2019, the year
when Young went pro after winning the NCAA 10,000-meter
title while at Brigham Young University. Young remained in
Provo, Utah, to train under BYU coach Ed Eyestone, a two-time
Olympic marathoner (and one of Pete’s 1988 Olympic
teammates). While at BYU, where he won two NCAA cross
country titles, Mantz mulled going pro. He initially stayed in
Provo but thought that he would soon move and join the
Oregon-based Bowerman Track Club or another group.
Instead, a few months became several months, then several
months became a year. After Mantz ran 2:08:16 at the 2022
Chicago Marathon in his debut, he thought, “Alright, this is
working.”
One key to a good training partner relationship is having
similar goals and outlooks. Mantz and Young have been on a
similar schedule since Chicago in 2023, where both set
personal bests, 13 seconds apart. Four months later, they
finished first (Mantz) and second (Young) at the U.S. Olympic
Marathon Trials, one second apart. Six months after that, Mantz
and Young placed eighth and ninth, respectively, in the Olympic
Marathon.
--- PAGE 112 ---
Mantz and Young typically run together six days a week.
They do their main run of the day in the morning. Depending on
their schedules, the two, who live a few miles away from each
other, sometimes also meet for their shorter afternoon run.
Why don’t they run together seven days a week? Mantz and
Young are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
Saints, the largest Mormon denomination. Both run their 100-
plus-mile weeks while devoting Sundays to their faith. Being an
outlier in that regard was one reason that Mantz decided not to
join a more formal pro group. “I knew nobody else would be
taking Sundays off,” he says, “and that added to the list of
reasons to stay here.”
Mantz and Young also demonstrate that differing
personalities can make for a great training relationship. Mantz,
a notoriously hard trainer, says, “I’m all about, ‘Let’s run faster
than we did at this point last build-up.’ I see it as I want to get
better every day.” Young is more aware of each day in a buildup
being just one piece of the puzzle. The two balance each other
well.
“My best workouts are keeping up with Conner, but Conner’s
worst workouts are staying with me,” Young says. “I can’t
remember the last time I dropped him in a workout or a long
run. That’s one of the beauties about working out with Conner
—you really do get pushed to your limit. My workouts with
Conner are usually far better than they would be by myself. I
just have to make sure I don’t go too hard.”
Yet it’s Mantz who says, “I would be way worse on my own. If
I’m not feeling good during a workout, I turn to Clayton and say,
‘You’re leading the next one.’ And he’s always like, ‘Alright, I’ll
help out,’ even if he’s also having a bad day.”
If you have a training partner who likes to hammer every day,
take a cue from Young’s approach.
“There are definitely workouts where Conner is totally
trashing me the last interval,” Young says, “and I just have to
say, ‘Okay, I did what Coach said and I’m faster now than a
year ago. I just really need to compare myself with myself.’”
--- PAGE 113 ---
“Typically, Coach will give us some splits he thinks we should
start at,” Young says about hard workouts. “But it’s not
uncommon for Conner to go faster than those splits, and so I
have to do these mental gymnastics of, ‘Do I go with Conner or
do I do what Coach said?’ Conner and I are obviously really
competitive, and you get a lot of confidence training with one of
the best athletes in the marathon, so should I stick with what
feels good and with what Coach said, or should I try to close
this gap and run with Conner? Sometimes I do, sometimes I
don’t.
“There are times I’m like, ‘Conner, why did you go that fast? I
thought Coach said to do this,’” Young says. “I can get
frustrated. But at the end of the day, it’s making me faster. As
long as I recognize that balance and look at the big picture,
having Conner with me as a training partner far outweighs the
little frustrations that I have every now and then.”
For many of us, meeting our running partners doesn’t just
help us get out the door. Doing so is often a dependable source
of pleasure. That’s as true for Olympians as it for regular
runners. “I just get excited sometimes thinking about the
camaraderie and that I get to run with Clayton today,” Mantz
says.
TECHNIQUES TO SPEED RECOVERY
In addition to finding the correct balance in your training and optimizing
your diet, there are a variety of techniques you can use to enhance your
body’s rate of recovery. Traditional aids to recovery from marathon training
include cooling down after hard workouts, cold-water immersion, and
massage therapy. Compression apparel may be helpful as well as various
recovery tools such as foam rollers, massage guns, compression boots, and
massage sticks. As discussed in chapter 2, appropriate post workout
nutrition has well-documented recovery benefits.
--- PAGE 114 ---
Cooling Down
The purpose of cooling down after a hard run is to help return your body to
preexercise conditions. This is the critical first step in managing your
recovery from high-intensity training or racing. A thorough cool-down
improves your recovery by increasing blood flow (which removes lactate
and metabolic waste products from your muscles and blood more quickly),
reducing adrenaline and noradrenaline levels (to help your metabolism
return to resting levels more quickly), and reducing DOMS.
Your cool-down should start with easy running for 10 to 15 minutes. (If
you’re too tired to run, then walk for an equivalent amount of time or try
some easy cross-training.) The optimal clearance of lactate, adrenaline, and
so on occurs if you start your cool-down run at about 60 to 75 percent of
your maximum heart rate (i.e., nice and easy) and slow to a jog or walk for
the last 5 minutes. After running, your muscles are warm and have very
good blood flow, which increases their ability to stretch without injury, so
this is the perfect time to gently stretch your muscles.
Cold-Water Immersion
Cold-water immersion shortly after a hard training session can reduce
muscle soreness and perceived fatigue. Although some runners have gotten
away from ice baths and other forms of cold-water immersion, we still
advocate the practice. It’s true that studies have shown reduced training
adaptations when strength training is followed by cold-water therapy
(Poppendieck et al. 2021). But research hasn’t consistently found a similar
result for endurance training.
To have a positive effect, you need to be in the cold water long enough
to lower the temperature in your muscles. The most effective water
temperature range is about 11-15 degrees Celsius (52-59 degrees
Fahrenheit). This temperature range can be achieved in a bathtub filled with
cold water with some ice added, or in a creek or the ocean in the spring or
fall. After a hard workout, cool-down jog, stretching, and a carbohydrate
drink, submerge yourself up to your waist and remember this enhances
recovery. The water will feel very cold when you first get in, but try to stay
in for 5 to 15 minutes.
--- PAGE 115 ---
MONITORING YOUR “RECOVER-
ABILITY”
Monitoring your body provides valuable information on your
adaptation to training, your risk of injury or illness, and your
readiness for the next hard training session. The right data can
help determine when you are overreaching so you can avoid
overtraining and remain healthy. You can use this information to
improve your recovery by modifying your training schedule to
your individual limits. A variety of smartwatches, fitness trackers,
and apps track your training (including your resting and training
heart rate data) and monitor key factors that influence recovery
from training, such as hours and quality of sleep. The software
generally provides a variety of analytic tools, such as heart rate
variability (HRV) to provide insights into how you are handling
the stress of training and overall life stress. This makes it easy to
track both your training and recovery factors and typically
provides warning signs when several factors are heading in the
wrong direction.
There are many ways to monitor your recovery, and it is
important to have a simple routine that is easy to follow so you
do not add more stress to your busy life. In combination, these
measures provide insight into your adaptation to training.
Typically, when results from these measures trend in the wrong
direction, energy levels and running performance deteriorate a
few days later. In addition to the details of your training, tracking
the following factors can identify patterns that predict extreme
overreaching or overtraining, illness, and injury.
Weight. Check your weight at the same time of day each
day or several times per week. While weight may naturally
fluctuate slightly from day to day, decreases in weight over
a few days may indicate dehydration. Decreases in weight
over a few weeks can indicate that you are not eating
enough calories, have an illness, or are overtraining.
--- PAGE 116 ---
Morning heart rate. Your heart rate when you first wake up
in the morning provides an indication of your recovery. It is
important to check your heart rate soon after you wake
because it increases as soon as you start thinking about
your plans for the day and by about 10 beats per minute
when you get up. In addition, waking to an alarm can
increase your heart rate and make the data less reliable. To
find your resting heart rate, therefore, wear a smartwatch or
heart rate monitor overnight or check your heart rate
immediately upon waking. In establishing your baseline,
your resting heart rate is the average of the lowest rate
across 3 days. So, if your morning heart rate was 50, 52,
and 51 across 3 days, consider 51 as your resting morning
heart rate. If your morning heart rate is more than 5 beats
per minute higher than usual, this may be an indication of
inadequate recovery or may be the first sign that you are
not well. Early detection can be particularly useful in
preventing illness.
Environmental conditions. Record the temperature and
humidity on hot days. Because of increased core body
temperature and dehydration, your body undergoes
substantially more stress when you run at 80 degrees
Fahrenheit (27 degrees Celsius) and high humidity than at
60 degrees Fahrenheit (16 degrees Celsius) and low
humidity. If you train hard or compete on a hot, humid day,
the heat you generate can overwhelm your body’s ability to
eliminate heat, causing your core temperature to climb,
which can increase recovery time. Similarly, as discussed in
chapter 2, severe dehydration also increases recovery time.
There’s great variation in how runners are affected by heat.
Monitoring these factors will reveal patterns that can help
you make needed adjustments during a stretch of hot
weather.
Hours of sleep. The number of hours you sleep is not
particularly important for any one night. Over several nights,
--- PAGE 117 ---
however, your quantity of sleep can influence your recovery
and ability to adapt positively to training. In combination
with other measures, it can also explain a lack of recovery
and indicate lifestyle changes required to enhance your
running performance and help prevent illness or injury.
Quality of sleep. The quality of your sleep is arguably
more important than the number of hours. Evaluate the
quality of your sleep each night, and try to be consistent in
your assessment: How soundly did you sleep? Were you
awake a lot in the middle of the night? Did you get out of
bed feeling refreshed? A reduction in quality of sleep is
often associated with overtraining. Reduced sleep quality
can also be caused by nonrunning stressors, but the result
for your running performance is the same. See “Sleep
Better, Run Faster” on page 79 for information on sleep-
monitoring devices and how to maximize the recovery
benefits of sleep.
Diet quality. Evaluate the overall quality of your diet each
day. Did your meals cover your carbohydrate and protein
needs? Did you get so hungry that you binged? Did the bulk
of your calories come from healthy foods? Often, a lack of
energy can be traced back to poor diet in the previous few
days.
Hydration level. Dehydration has a negative effect on
running performance and slows recovery from training.
Evaluate your hydration level each day. Was your urine
clear? Did you drink small amounts regularly so you seldom
felt thirsty? Did your mouth and throat often feel dry? Your
daily weight also provides a good indication of your
hydration level.
Muscle soreness. It is not unusual for runners to have
slightly sore muscles most of the time. An increase in
muscle soreness can be due to a hard workout or running
downhill. Evaluate your general muscle soreness each day.
Did your soreness lessen after a few miles of running? Did
--- PAGE 118 ---
your soreness seem explainable by your most recent
workouts? If increased general muscle soreness lasts more
than 4 or 5 days, it is likely that you are overreaching or
overtraining. Soreness in a specific muscle indicates a
potential injury, whereas more general muscle soreness
provides an indication of your recovery and adaptation to
training.
Energy level. An assessment of energy level is one of the
best indications of recovery from training. Evaluate your
energy level each day. Did you have the energy to
accomplish your running and daily life goals? Did you feel
alert and focused when running or performing a task? If
your energy level is reduced for more than 3 days, it is
important to determine the cause of the reduction. Typical
causes of reduced energy levels are lack of carbohydrate
intake, training hard too many days in a row, illness, low
iron levels, dehydration, and lack of sleep. By reviewing
your training and considering your lifestyle factors, you
should be able to identify the likely cause of a low energy
level.
Heart rate variability (HRV): Your heart rate constantly
makes small adjustments up and down, so the time
between successive beats varies. HRV is a measure of this
beat-to-beat variability. The beat-to-beat variation is
determined by the autonomic nervous system, which
consists of two branches, the sympathetic and
parasympathetic. The sympathetic branch is often termed
“fight or flight” and prepares the body for action by
increasing heart rate, blood pressure, blood flow to the
muscles, etc. The parasympathetic branch is referred to as
“rest and digest” and has the opposite influence (reduced
heart rate and blood pressure, increased blood flow for
digestion, etc). HRV is due to the influence of these two
branches of the autonomic nervous system in increasing
--- PAGE 119 ---
and decreasing heart rate (Lundstrom, Foreman, and Biltz
2023).
An upward trend in HRV (i.e., more beat-to-beat
variability) is an indication of positively handling current and
recent training and other stressors. Decreases in HRV
across multiple days suggest that the training load and
other stressors are beyond a sustainable level.
Tracking HRV is a complex type of analysis that is
provided by a variety of smartwatches, fitness trackers, and
training software, including specific HRV analysis software.
These typically convert the beat-to-beat data to a statistic
called RMSSD (root mean square of the successive
differences between heart beats), which can provide useful
insights into the response to training.
The best time for HRV measurement is upon waking
while still lying in bed. This is better than having HRV
recorded while sleeping due to the effect of the various
phases of sleep on HRV. Because a variety of factors can
influence HRV, it is best to track changes across a 7-day
rolling average rather than responding to a single low daily
HRV value. With this approach, you gain a useful measure
for considering when a few low-intensity or recovery days
may be needed.
HRV varies among individuals, so you need to establish
your baseline over a few weeks and then observe how your
HRV increases and decreases rather than comparing your
HRV to someone else’s. HRV increases with age, and men
tend to have slightly higher HRV than women (Plews et al.
2013; Lundstrom, Foreman, and Biltz 2023). Due to the
complexity of using HRV to assess the response to training
(which would require several more pages to explain), we
recommend learning from an experienced coach or
exercise physiologist to help ensure you use HRV along
with other data and within the context of changes in your
training load and other life stressors.
--- PAGE 120 ---
SUPER SHOES AND SORENESS
The best way to avoid setbacks caused by muscle soreness is to
not incur soreness in the first place. That’s a bonus benefit of
super shoes for many marathoners. We’ll define super shoes as
any racing model with a large amount of next-generation midsole
cushioning, rockered geometry, and a stabilizing element in the
midsole (most often, a carbon fiber plate). That super shoes
make most people faster is indisputable. Although the original
research on super shoes showing improvements in running
economy compared to conventional shoes was conducted on
elite runners, subsequent research has found similar gains for
slower runners. In many studies, the average improvement in
running economy is usually around 3 percent (Joubert and Jones
2022; Joubert, Dominy and Burns 2023).
What’s relevant here is that once a large number of runners
started doing long runs and harder workouts in super shoes, they
found not only that they were faster during those runs but also
that they weren’t as sore after them. At least one small study has
codified this real-world observation. In it, runners who wore
super shoes for eight weeks reported less muscle soreness than
those who wore traditional racing flats (Matties and Rowley
2023).
As with most things in running, there are caveats. Feeling less
beat-up after a long run or hard workout is always welcome. It
can be tempting to think that, thanks to super shoes, you can
handle more volume, intensity, or both. But muscle soreness is
only one aspect of fatigue. Err on the side of caution when
pondering any big jumps in hard training based solely on this one
factor.
Also, resist applying the runner’s more-is-better mindset to
how often you run in super shoes. The impact forces of running
have to go somewhere. Super shoes might shift some of those
forces to foot bones and the plantar fascia (because of the stiff
--- PAGE 121 ---
plates) or knees and hips (because of less calf and ankle
involvement).
Given that most running injuries stem from repetitive stress, it
makes sense to rotate among a few different types of running
shoes, even if you’re slower in some of them. A good solution is
to save your super shoes for hard workouts and a few long runs
in your marathon buildup. Super trainers—a heavier, less
aggressively rockered version of a super shoe—can be a good
choice for most of your long runs and recovery days. Then do the
remainder of your running in nonplated trainers.
Massage
Massage therapy is widely used by competitive marathoners to improve
recovery, relax, and prevent injury. There is increasing scientific evidence
and much anecdotal evidence for the benefits of massage therapy for
athletes in general and distance runners in particular. Muscles feel fatigued
after massage, so runners typically have a massage after training and avoid
a deep massage the day before a hard workout or race.
The established benefits of massage are improved blood flow to the
massaged area, decreased muscle tension, improved mobility of the muscle
and surrounding connective tissue, enhanced sense of relaxation, and the
breakdown of scar tissue. The most important benefit may be the
identification of tight areas before they lead to injury.
If you can afford massage, it may help you recover more quickly from
hard marathon training. To be effective, sports massage should be
pleasantly uncomfortable (i.e., it shouldn’t be gentle).
There are many different types of massage therapy, and as with any
discipline, there are wide ranges in expertise among massage therapists. It is
best to use a massage therapist who is a member of the American Massage
Therapy Association (or a similar national organization in other countries)
and has been recommended by other runners so you can be confident that
the sessions will be effective.
You can supplement massage sessions with self-massage on tight
muscles that can be easily reached, such as the quadriceps, hamstrings,
calves, and feet. A wide variety of recovery tools are available for runners
--- PAGE 122 ---
to use at home, including foam rollers, recovery rollers, massage guns,
compression boots, and massage sticks. Each of these tools rolls and
compresses the muscles to enhance recovery from training. These tools are
useful in helping to identify tight areas that, if allowed to tighten further,
may lead to injury. They can help loosen tight muscles and provide
feedback on when you may need an appointment with a physical therapist
or massage therapist. Many runners also use foam rollers, recovery rollers,
and massage sticks on a few tight muscles as part of their warm-up before
running.
SLEEP BETTER, RUN FASTER
Getting a good night’s sleep is important for recovery and
positive adaptation to training. Running generally improves both
the quantity and quality of sleep, but overtraining can interfere
with sleep patterns. No one knows for sure how exercise leads to
improved sleep, but the mechanism may be a change in the
balance of sympathetic to parasympathetic nervous system
activity. As per the HRV discussion earlier in this chapter,
stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system increases heart
rate, blood pressure, metabolic rate, and mental activity, all of
which are counterproductive to falling asleep, while
parasympathetic activity has the opposite effect. During running,
sympathetic activity increases, but endurance training leads to a
decrease in sympathetic activity relative to parasympathetic
activity when you are not exercising. This alteration in the
balance of sympathetic to parasympathetic activity may allow
you to fall asleep more quickly and to sleep more deeply.
The benefits of sleep include increased secretion of human
growth hormone and improved brain function, memory, immune
function, reaction time, and mental health. Sleep improves
hypothalamic functioning, which improves recovery and the
body’s ability to adapt to stress. The benefits of sleep are
complex and interrelated; a chronic lack of sleep interferes with
--- PAGE 123 ---
your ability to positively adapt to training and compromises
marathon performance.
A change in sleeping habits is an early warning sign of
nonfunctional overreaching and overtraining. The physical and
psychological stress of training beyond your individual threshold
may stimulate the sympathetic nervous system, leading to
irritability and reducing the quality and quantity of sleep. A
reduction in sleep is a double-edged sword for a runner because
much of the body’s recovery and rebuilding occurs during sleep.
During preparation for your marathon, you should ensure that
you get adequate sleep or you may experience a decline in
performance, have immune system suppression, and be more
prone to injury.
When you have uncharacteristic difficulty sleeping, you could
be training hard too frequently. You may be able to improve your
sleep fairly easily by backing off your training and not running too
late in the day. The harder you run, the greater the stimulus to
your nervous system, so cutting back your training intensity will
likely benefit your ability to sleep more than cutting back your
mileage.
To improve your sleep pattern, stick with a routine that works
for you. Eating dinner and going to bed at approximately the
same time each day will help set your body clock so that your
body and mind automatically shut down at the same time each
night. In addition, avoid the blue light from electronic device
screens at night, which affects the sleep-inducing hormone
melatonin, and avoid caffeinated or alcoholic beverages for
several hours before bedtime. If noise interferes with your ability
to fall asleep or disturbs your sleep, a white or pink noise
machine or other device or app that provides background noise
may help. Finally, avoid lying down until you are ready to go to
sleep, so that when you do lie down, your mind receives another
signal to ease toward sleep.
If your lifestyle allows it, a late morning or early afternoon nap
may be beneficial for recovery and help you feel more alert for
afternoon or evening training sessions. To ensure that your nap
--- PAGE 124 ---
doesn’t interfere with your nighttime sleep, keep your naps under
90 minutes and complete your nap prior to 2 p.m. so there’s
enough time afterward for your brain to go through the daily
process that allows you to drift off to sleep at night.
A wide variety of personal sleep monitoring devices are now
available, which record data such as heart rate, breathing rate,
restlessness in bed, REM sleep, temperature, humidity, and
HRV. They can provide graphs of the quality and quantity of your
sleep and much else. A number of these measures are not
backed up by solid research, but if you love technology and have
a few dollars to spare, these devices may help you better
understand whether you are getting enough sleep, and if not,
what to do about it.
Compression Apparel
Compression apparel applies external pressure to the muscle groups. For
runners, the most effective products apply graduated pressure, which
applies the strongest pressure to the foot or ankle and reduces up the leg to
the hip. Manufacturers make many claims for the benefits of compression
apparel, including improved venous return of blood to the heart, faster
muscle repair, reduced fatigue and DOMS, and faster recovery.
Research on compression clothing continues to evolve, but recent
evidence suggests that compression tights and knee-high socks may be
useful for runners in reducing DOMS and perceived fatigue during
recovery. Compression socks can also help a traveling marathoner during
plane rides because they are particularly useful for reducing stiffness and
swollen ankles when flying.
In this chapter, we looked at how ensuring adequate recovery allows you
to get the most from your long runs and hard workouts. Successful
marathoning, however, often involves more than just running. Just as true
recovery days can mean the difference between adequate and optimal
progress in your training, supplemental training such as flexibility work and
core strength training can help you get the biggest bang for your marathon-
training buck.
--- PAGE 125 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 126 ---
T
4
SUPPLEMENTARY TRAINING
Description
his chapter focuses on several important aspects of training that can
help you make it to the marathon starting line uninjured and better
able to maintain your target marathon race pace for 26.2 miles (42.2
km). We’ll describe five types of supplementary training that often get
--- PAGE 127 ---
lumped into the category of cross-training but deserve to be treated
separately.
First, we look at the importance of flexibility for marathon performance
and how to improve it. Second, we examine core strength training, which is
a vital aspect of marathon training. Third, we look at why strength training
is beneficial for marathoners and how to incorporate it into your overall
training program. Fourth, we describe a few technique drills that can
improve your running form. Finally, we discuss various forms of aerobic
cross-training that will enhance your cardiovascular fitness and reduce your
likelihood of incurring injuries.
For the flexibility, core, resistance, and form exercises, we’ve given a
brief explanation of how to perform each exercise and how each one
benefits marathoners. If you have an especially hard time with any of the
exercises, you’re most likely weak or tight—or both!—in that area.
Addressing your most troublesome areas will lead to faster, more enjoyable
training and racing. Figure 4.1 provides a diagram of the muscles of the
body to use as a reference when performing the stretches and exercises in
this chapter.
--- PAGE 128 ---
Figure 4.1 Use these diagrams as a reference for locating the muscles worked in the
stretches and exercises provided in this chapter. Description
Supplementary work—especially core strength training, form drills, and
flexibility exercises—is easy to skip when you’re tired and your main
training goal is getting in your long runs and tempo runs. These extra
sessions, however, will provide refreshing variety to your training. Even
more important, correcting imbalances and weaknesses in your body can
--- PAGE 129 ---
contribute to better running form. With that improved form, you can train
harder and longer at a lower risk of injury, and you will be able to maintain
a more effective running technique throughout the marathon. When
scheduling your training, count time for these sessions as an integral part of
your marathon preparation.
Description
--- PAGE 130 ---
FLEXIBILITY TRAINING
Marathon training takes a toll on the body. One of the greatest costs of all
that mileage is a loss of flexibility. Improving your natural range of motion
can improve your running technique and increase your stride length while
reducing your risk of injury.
Tight muscles provide resistance that limits your ability to stride out.
Stretching not only increases your muscle length but also improves the
length of the connective tissue surrounding the muscle fibers.
There are two primary types of stretching. In static stretching, you
isolate a muscle group and maintain a muscle in a stretched position,
typically for 20 seconds or more. With dynamic flexibility exercises, you
stretch your muscles by repeatedly moving a joint (e.g., your hip) through
its range of motion.
Both types of stretching have a place in your marathon training.
Dynamic flexibility exercises are a good way to stretch muscle groups
before the muscles are warmed up, such as before a normal training run.
Prerun dynamic flexibility exercises prepare your muscles to run by
increasing blood circulation, improving joint mobility, and working your
muscles through their natural range of motion. Your dynamic flexibility
exercise routine is an important component of your warm-up before a hard
workout or a race. Dynamic stretches are particularly useful for runners
who need to get out the door early in the morning because the movements
are time efficient and a good way to increase your range of motion after a
night in bed.
Static stretching is best performed after running or as part of a
supplementary training session. A few static stretches can also be worked in
with your dynamic flexibility exercises as part of your warm-up. Static
stretching lengthens your muscle fibers as well as the connective tissue
around and at the ends of your muscle fibers. After running, try to allow a
minimum of 10 minutes for stretching your major muscle groups. For day-
to-day post run maintenance, select several of the stretches in table 4.2 on
page 92 that work on the tightest parts of your body. To achieve gains in
flexibility, do the complete flexibility program in table 4.2 two to three
times per week.
--- PAGE 131 ---
If you have the time and interest, yoga can be a delightful addition to
marathon training, counteracting the impact of high mileage by improving
flexibility, core strength, and posture and helping correct muscle
imbalances. There is an array of yoga styles (e.g., Hatha, Ashtanga,
Vinyasa, and power yoga), all suitable for runners. One yoga session per
week is probably all you can fit in during marathon training, but it may be
the activity that you look forward to most. In our training schedules, yoga
can easily fit in a recovery day or general aerobic training day. There are
many good runner-oriented apps and videos that will guide you through an
at-home program in the likely scenario that you don’t regularly have time
for an hour-long studio class while marathon training.
PRERUN DYNAMIC FLEXIBILITY
ROUTINE
In the dynamic flexibility program in table 4.1, do two sets of each exercise.
Perform the first set with a gentle intensity and the second set with a
moderate intensity. Don’t stretch forcefully.
Table 4.1 Dynamic Flexibility Warm-Up
Exercise Repetitions
1. Cat-cow 6
2. Leg swing 12 per leg
3. Side swing 12 per leg
4. Side lunge 6 per side (alternating sides)
5. Walking knee hugs 8 per leg (alternating legs)
6. Side skip 12 in each direction
EXERCISE 1: CAT-COW
--- PAGE 132 ---
Description
How many: 6
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your neck, shoulders, spine, and hips
How to do it:
Get on your hands and knees, with your knees under your hips and your wrists under your
shoulders. Inhale and gently arch your back, lengthening your spine (a).
Pause, then exhale, lowering your head, pulling in your abdominals, and allowing your back
to round (b).
Repeat until you complete this exercise 6 times.
EXERCISE 2: LEG SWING
--- PAGE 133 ---
Description
How many: 12 per leg
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your hip flexors, gluteals (aka glutes), and
hamstrings
How to do it:
Stand next to a wall or other solid object, bracing yourself with one arm.
Swing your leg that is farthest from the wall forward and back through its full range of
motion (a and b).
Face the other way and repeat with your other leg, alternating until you complete 12
repetitions with each leg.
EXERCISE 3: SIDE SWING
--- PAGE 134 ---
Description
How many: 12 per leg
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your adductors, abductors, and glutes
How to do it: Stand facing a wall or other solid object and place your hands against it,
about shoulder-width apart.
Start with your feet together about 2 feet from the wall.
Swing one leg side-to-side through its full range of motion (a and b), with your upper body
facing the wall.
Repeat with the other leg, alternating until you complete 12 repetitions with each leg.
EXERCISE 4: SIDE LUNGE
--- PAGE 135 ---
Description
How many: 6 per side
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your hips, glutes, abductors, adductors, and groin
How to do it:
Step to the side into a lunge position, with your leading leg bent at the knee and your other
leg straight. Keep your core engaged and the foot of your leading leg aligned with your
knee.
Hold for several seconds, then push through the heel of your leading leg to return to a
standing position and repeat with the other leg. Alternate until you complete 6 repetitions
with each leg.
EXERCISE 5: WALKING KNEE HUGS
--- PAGE 136 ---
Description
How many: 8 per leg (alternating legs)
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your glutes, hamstrings, and lower back
How to do it:
Stand with your legs shoulder-width apart. Take a step forward and bring the knee of your
leading leg up to your chest. Keep your core engaged and avoid hunching forward.
Wrap your hands around your knee and pull it closer to your chest. Hold for about 2
seconds before lowering your leg to the ground.
Repeat with the other leg, alternating legs until you complete 8 knee hugs with each leg.
EXERCISE 6: SIDE SKIP
--- PAGE 137 ---
Description
How many: 12 in each direction
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your shoulders, upper back, glutes, adductors,
abductors, and calves
How to do it:
Start with your arms at your sides and your feet shoulder-width apart.
Skip sideways 12 times, clicking the sides of your shoes together (a) with each step while
swinging your arms up through their full range of vertical motion (like a jumping jack) (b).
Repeat in the opposite direction.
POSTRUN OR SUPPLEMENTARY
STATIC STRETCHING ROUTINE
Doing static stretching after a run and as a stand-alone session will help you
maintain your flexibility during marathon training. Static stretching should
be firm enough to create adequate tension in your muscles but gentle
enough that your muscles can relax. If you stretch aggressively, your
--- PAGE 138 ---
muscles will tighten in a protective reflex to prevent straining or tearing of
muscle fibers. You need to stretch gently and consistently to obtain
improved length in the muscle and surrounding connective tissue.
For static stretching, the traditional recommendation is to hold a stretch
for at least 30 seconds and to do each stretch once or twice. To strike an
optimal balance between effectiveness and efficiency, we recommend
holding stretches for 15 to 30 seconds and performing each stretch 2 or 3
times. Start with mild pressure and gradually increase the stretch, staying
within your body’s limits. If a stretch becomes painful, back off and check
that you are using the right technique. Be sure to breathe while you stretch.
Some runners inadvertently hold their breath while stretching, thereby
reducing their ability to relax and making stretching less effective.
Two important areas for marathoners to focus on are the hip flexors and
hamstrings. Your hip flexors (primarily iliopsoas and quadriceps) are the
muscles that lift your thigh relative to your hip. These are some of the
strongest muscles in the body, and they tend to become short and inflexible
in runners. Improving the flexibility of your hip flexors increases your
thigh’s ability to move back relative to your pelvis, thereby allowing your
stride length to increase.
Tight hamstrings restrict your stride length by preventing your thigh
from swinging forward completely. The combination of tight hip flexors
and tight hamstrings causes the familiar marathoners’ shuffle. Stretching
your hamstrings consistently (a slow but steady process) will allow your
stride to increase to its natural optimal length. The static stretches in table
4.2 will help you improve your flexibility over time.
Table 4.2 Static Stretching Flexibility
Program
Exercise Repetitions Duration
1. Bent-leg calf stretch 2-3 per side 15-30 seconds
2. Straight-leg calf stretch 2-3 per side 15-30 seconds
3. Lying hamstring stretch 2-3 per side 15-30 seconds
4. Quadriceps stretch 2-3 per side 15-30 seconds
--- PAGE 139 ---
Exercise Repetitions Duration
5. Hip flexor stretch 2-3 per side 15-30 seconds
6. Glute stretch 2-3 per side 15-30 seconds
7. Hip rotator stretch 2-3 per side 15-30 seconds
8. Shoulder and lat stretch 2-3 15-30 seconds
Program Notes
Perform 2 or 3 repetitions of each stretch before moving to the next
stretch.
Breathe normally while stretching; don’t hold your breath.
Don’t stretch an area that’s painful.
EXERCISE 1: BENT-LEG CALF STRETCH
Description
--- PAGE 140 ---
How many: 2 to 3 repetitions of 15 to 30 seconds per side
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your soleus (deep, lower calf) muscles
How to do it: Stand an arm’s length away from a wall with your feet shoulder-width apart
and your toes pointing directly forward.
Slide your left foot back so your weight is over your right foot.
Slowly bend your right knee until you feel a stretch in your lower calf muscle.
Repeat on the other side.
EXERCISE 2: STRAIGHT-LEG CALF
STRETCH
Description
How many: 2 to 3 repetitions of 15 to 30 seconds per side
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your gastrocnemius (upper calf) muscles
How to do it: Stand an arm’s length away from a wall with your feet shoulder-width apart
and your toes pointing directly forward.
--- PAGE 141 ---
Step halfway toward the wall with your left leg and lean forward so that your hands are flat
on the wall.
Keep your right foot flat on the floor and your right knee straight.
Slowly move your hips forward until you feel a stretch in the calf muscle of your right leg.
Repeat on the other side.
EXERCISE 3: LYING HAMSTRING STRETCH
Description
How many: 2 to 3 repetitions of 15 to 30 seconds per side
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your hamstring muscles
How to do it: Lie on your back on the floor with your legs extended. Loop a resistance
band, rope, or towel under your right foot and hold the ends in both hands.
Gently pull your right leg up, keeping it straight or slightly bent, until you feel a stretch in
your hamstring muscle.
You can alter the stretch by pointing your toes for one repetition and raising your toes
toward your shin for the next repetition.
Repeat on the other side.
EXERCISE 4: QUADRICEPS STRETCH
--- PAGE 142 ---
Description
How many: 2 to 3 repetitions of 15 to 30 seconds per side
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your quadriceps muscles (major muscles that
straighten the knee)
How to do it:
Stand near a wall for balance. Lift your right foot off the floor, bend your right knee, and pull
your right heel toward your buttocks until you feel a stretch in the quadriceps.
Don’t lean forward or allow your lower back to arch.
Repeat on the other side.
EXERCISE 5: HIP FLEXOR STRETCH
--- PAGE 143 ---
Description
How many: 2 to 3 repetitions of 15 to 30 seconds per side
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your hip flexors (muscles connecting the front of
your hip to your trunk)
How to do it:
Start in a kneeling position with your right knee on a mat or thin pillow, and move your left
leg forward so that your foot is flat on the floor and your left shin is approximately vertical.
While keeping your upper body vertical and your head up, move your hips forward by
contracting your glutes until you feel a stretch across the front of your right hip.
Activating your lower abdominals will adjust where you feel this stretch. You can make this
stretch more advanced and effective by raising your arm (on the same side as your kneeling
leg) overhead or using your hand to bring your back leg’s heel up toward your buttocks (as
in the quadriceps stretch).
Repeat on the other side.
EXERCISE 6: GLUTE STRETCH
--- PAGE 144 ---
Description
How many: 2 to 3 repetitions of 15 to 30 seconds per side
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your glutes, lower back, and external rotator
muscles
How to do it:
Lie on your back on the floor with your knees and hips bent to 90 degrees and your feet flat
against a wall.
Cross your left ankle over your right knee, and push the inside of your left knee toward the
wall until you feel a stretch on the outside of your left hip.
Repeat on the other side.
EXERCISE 7: HIP ROTATOR STRETCH
--- PAGE 145 ---
Description
How many: 2 to 3 repetitions of 15 to 30 seconds per side
How it helps: Improves hip rotation by stretching your glutes, hip rotators, and the muscles
of your lower back
How to do it:
Lie on your back on the floor, with your arms out to the side and your legs outstretched.
Lift your left leg off the floor, bending it at the knee and hip to 90 degrees.
Rotate your left leg across your body until you feel a stretch in your hip, torso, and lower
back.
Use your hand to push your left leg across your body and toward the floor.
Keep your head and shoulders in contact with the floor.
Repeat on the other side.
EXERCISE 8: SHOULDER AND LAT
STRETCH
--- PAGE 146 ---
How many: 2 to 3 repetitions of 15 to 30 seconds
How it helps: Improves the flexibility of your shoulders, upper chest, and back
How to do it:
Kneel in front of a chair or Swiss ball, or stand in front of a table or countertop. Stretch your
arms out in front of you and rest both hands on the surface.
With your upper body horizontal and your head looking straight down at the floor, slowly
push your chest downward toward the floor until you feel a stretch through your chest,
upper back, and shoulders.
CORE STRENGTH TRAINING
Long-distance running develops muscular endurance in specific leg and hip
muscles and is wonderful for your cardiovascular system, but it tends to
make some muscles strong and tight while others remain weak. Modern
lifestyles exacerbate these problems. Sitting for much of the day tightens
the hip flexors, weakens the hip muscles and abdominals, and deactivates
the glutes, all of which lead to poor posture and, frequently, lower back
pain. Sitting with poor posture puts pressure on the lumbar discs, shifts the
head forward, and rotates the shoulders. Sitting in a car has the same effect,
so individuals with a desk job and a long car commute have a double
challenge. Hunching over your phone also tends to round your shoulders
and move your head forward. None of this is helpful for marathon runners,
who depend on a stable core to maintain good running form for 26.2 miles
(42.2 km).
Core strength training can eliminate these imbalances, thereby
preventing injuries and reducing the degree to which your form deteriorates
--- PAGE 147 ---
as you fatigue during the marathon. Core training consists of strengthening
your abdominals, obliques, hips, lower back, pelvic floor, diaphragm, and
glutes. Core strength exercises can be done in the comfort of your own
home—you don’t need a gym or machines, just the dedication to stick with
the exercises.
When you run, your trunk acts as a fixed base while your legs work as
levers relative to that base to propel you forward. If the torso and pelvic
muscles that form your fixed base are weak or fatigue quickly, you can’t
maintain an efficient body position while running. By improving the
strength and muscular endurance of your pelvis and torso, you provide a
more stable base of support from which your legs work. This improvement
will allow you to maintain your stride length throughout the marathon; part
of the reason that many marathoners slow as the race progresses is that their
strides shorten as they tire.
In addition, runners who lead an otherwise normal modern life often
have weak abdominal muscles. This weakness allows the pelvis to rotate
forward and put more stretch on the hamstrings. This is a less efficient
position for your running and also increases your risk of lower back
problems. Core strength exercises strengthen the abdominal muscles and
other stabilizer muscles of the pelvis and trunk. By improving the position
of your pelvis, you create a more stable base.
Core strength work is part of elite marathoners’ training the world over.
Those who don’t do core training have become the exception. Some elites
do short sessions of core training most days of the week. Others do longer
sessions a few days per week. The results can be seen both in their low
incidence of injury and in their late-race form, which varies little from the
form they exhibit in the early miles.
If you’re a marathoner with a busy nonrunning life, aim to do core
strength training three times per week. It can fit in anywhere within the
week other than immediately before a hard running workout, so schedule
your core sessions whenever you are most likely to do them.
The following core strength program includes six exercises. We kept the
program as brief as possible to make it easy to fit into your schedule at least
three times per week.
In some of the exercises, a key step is to activate your transverse
abdominal muscles (TVAs). The TVAs are located deep within the
--- PAGE 148 ---
abdominals and wrap around the front of your trunk like a corset, providing
stability to the spine. It is important to be able to isolate and activate the
TVAs; for most people, doing so requires conscious practice. To activate
your TVAs, gently draw your belly button in toward your spine while
exhaling slowly, as if trying to hollow out your belly.
Table 4.3 Core Strength Session
Exercise Repetitions
1. Bird dog 12 per side
2. Leg push-away 15 per side
3. Single-leg glute bridge 10 per side
4. Side plank 5 per side, 20 seconds each
5. Bicycle crunch 12 per side
6. Prone plank with leg lift 30 seconds lifting each leg 3 times
Perform this sequence of exercises twice.
Program Notes
Perform these six exercises as a circuit. That is, do one set of the first
exercise, then move immediately to the second exercise, then the
third, and so on. When you have completed the sixth exercise, return
to the first exercise and complete a second circuit.
Rest briefly (15-20 sec) between exercises and 1 to 2 minutes
between sets. Initially, you may not be able to complete the
recommended number of repetitions of each exercise. That’s okay
and just shows that these exercises will be useful for you. Do as
many as you can while maintaining the correct technique, and you
will gradually build to where you can do more. If you find that an
exercise becomes too easy, you can increase the number of
repetitions, add a third set, or find more challenging versions of most
of these exercises online.
EXERCISE 1: BIRD DOG
--- PAGE 149 ---
Description
How many: 12 repetitions per side
How it helps: Strengthens your lower back and glutes and improves your balance and
coordination, thereby increasing your ability to maintain good running posture when fatigued
How to do it:
Start on your hands and knees. Draw your belly button in to activate your TVAs.
Lift and extend one arm and the opposite leg off the floor to a horizontal position as shown,
and hold for 2 seconds.
Return your hand and knee to the floor and repeat with the opposite side, alternating until
you complete 12 repetitions on each side.
Keep your core activated and your hips aligned throughout this exercise.
EXERCISE 2: LEG PUSH-AWAY
--- PAGE 150 ---
Description
How many: 15 repetitions per side
How it helps: Improves your ability to activate your deep core muscles for better control of
your hips and trunk; improves stability and your ability to maintain effective running
technique
How to do it:
Lie on the floor with your knees and hips bent at 90 degrees so your thighs are vertical and
your shins are parallel to the floor. Place your hands on your hips. Draw your belly button in
to activate your TVAs, contract your lower abdominal muscles, and push your lower back
toward the floor (a).
While holding this lower abdominal contraction, make sure you can breathe normally.
Slowly lower and extend one leg until your heel almost touches the floor (b).
Return to the start position and repeat with the opposite leg, alternating legs until you
complete 15 repetitions on each side.
EXERCISE 3: SINGLE-LEG GLUTE BRIDGE
--- PAGE 151 ---
How many: 10 repetitions per side
How it helps: Strengthens your hips, glutes, and hamstrings to allow full hip extension and
a longer stride
How to do it:
Lie on the floor with one knee bent and your other leg extended.
Place your arms flat on the floor by your sides and activate your core.
Contract the glutes on your bent leg and push up through your hip so your body is in a
straight line from your shoulders through the hip, knee, and foot of the extended leg.
Hold for 2-3 seconds, then lower your hips to briefly touch the floor and repeat.
After 10 repetitions with 1 leg, switch legs.
EXERCISE 4: SIDE PLANK
--- PAGE 152 ---
Description
How many: 5 repetitions of 20 seconds per side
How it helps: Strengthens stabilizing muscles on your side from glutes through shoulders,
including obliques and TVAs; helps reduce wasted side-to-side motion
How to do it:
Lie on the floor on your side. Place your elbow on the floor directly under your shoulder, and
place your top hand on your hip or extend it upward (a).
Hold your feet together, and align your body in a straight line (from front to back). Draw your
belly button in to activate your TVAs.
Lift your hip off the floor so your body is in a straight line from your heels to shoulders and
hold for 20 seconds (b).
Lower to the floor, rest briefly, and repeat on the other side, alternating sides until you
complete 5 repetitions on each side.
EXERCISE 5: BICYCLE CRUNCH
--- PAGE 153 ---
Description
How many: 12 per side
How it helps: Engages most core muscles, including abdominals, obliques, and TVAs;
improves your core stability and ability to maintain good trunk position when fatigued during
running
How to do it:
Lie on your back with your knees bent, your thighs perpendicular to the floor, and your
hands gently supporting your head.
Engage your core to lift your shoulders off the floor.
Straighten your left leg while rotating your trunk to bring your left elbow to your right knee
and your right knee toward your left elbow.
Return to the starting position and switch sides. Alternate sides until you complete 12
repetitions on each side.
EXERCISE 6: PRONE PLANK WITH LEG LIFT
--- PAGE 154 ---
Description
How many: 30 seconds, lifting each leg 3 times
How it helps: Engages most core muscles; reduces lateral midsection movement to
maintain good running technique
How to do it:
Lie face-down with your weight supported on your toes and forearms and activate your
TVAs. Your elbows should be shoulder-width apart and directly under your shoulders, and
your feet should be hip-width apart (a).
Lift one leg about 12 inches off the ground (b) and hold for 2 to 3 seconds, then lower your
leg and repeat with the other leg. Continue until you have raised each leg off the ground
three times.
STRENGTH TRAINING
Resistance training using weights, bands, or your own body weight can
correct muscle imbalances and prevent injuries. We’ve already discussed
core strength training, a type of resistance training with a specific purpose.
Other types of resistance training will strengthen your leg muscles and get
your arms and shoulders, which help drive you forward, working more
effectively. Done correctly, resistance training can reduce your risk of injury
--- PAGE 155 ---
by strengthening both muscles and connective tissue, including tendons and
ligaments, and may improve your running economy so you use less oxygen
at a given pace. Done incorrectly, resistance training can make you muscle-
bound, tighten up your muscles, leave you injured, and give you extra bulk
that you might not want to be carrying around come the 23-mile mark. The
program outlined on the following pages is designed to increase your
strength without adding unwanted pounds.
The greatest gains for marathoners are obtained by including exercises
that strengthen your propulsive and stabilizing muscles. The closer those
exercises simulate how you would use those muscles during running, the
greater the benefits for your running performance.
Schedule your resistance training sessions so they’re not right before or
after a hard running workout. If you run before or after work, lunchtime is
an excellent opportunity to get in lifting sessions that won’t detract from
your running.
Lifting for the Long Run
Most runners naturally use the most economical stride length for a given
speed, which implies that runners shouldn’t alter their stride length. That
advice is correct for the short term, but that doesn’t mean you can’t or
shouldn’t attempt to improve your body to make it a more effective running
machine. Over months and years, you can increase your stride length by
improving your strength and flexibility. The gains per stride will be small,
but when multiplied over thousands of strides, the benefits can be
substantial.
Resistance training can improve running performance by increasing the
force that your slow-twitch muscle fibers develop. Lifting to increase
muscle size is counterproductive to endurance (and particularly marathon)
performance. During endurance training, you work to increase the capillary
density and mitochondrial content of your muscles. When muscle size is
increased, the capillary and mitochondrial density of the muscle is reduced.
The program that follows is designed to improve strength specifically for
your running without adding unneeded muscle.
Resistance training generally should be included in your training
program two times a week. (See table 4.5 for a sample session.) With this
--- PAGE 156 ---
frequency you will see steady improvements in strength but will not
compromise the rest of your training program because of excess fatigue.
The strength-training program below takes a conservative approach,
avoiding high loads that, while potentially beneficial, have a greater risk of
injury. Core strength training can be done as a warm-up before your
strength-training session. The best place to fit resistance training into your
weekly schedule is whenever your muscles are not too fatigued and you do
not have a hard running workout later that day or the next day. General
aerobic training days and medium-long run days often work well for your
resistance training sessions.
Table 4.4 Strength-Training Session
Exercise Repetitions
1. Push-up 12
2. Step-up with knee raise 8 per leg
3. Calf raise 12
4. Bench dip 12
5. Lunge 12 per leg
6. Triceps press 12
7. Squat 12
Perform this sequence of exercises twice.
Program Notes
A gentle aerobic warm-up or completing your core strength program
will enhance the safety and effectiveness of this program.
Activating your TVAs by gently drawing in your belly button will
provide stability to the spine and decrease the likelihood of injury
while performing these exercises.
Similar to the core strength program, you may not initially be able to
complete the recommended number of repetitions of each exercise.
That’s an indication that these exercises will be particularly useful
for you. Do as many as you can while maintaining the correct
--- PAGE 157 ---
technique, and you will gradually build to where you can do more. If
you find that an exercise becomes too easy, you can increase the
number of repetitions, add a third set, hold dumbbells or increase the
weights of the dumbbells, or find more challenging versions of most
of these exercises online.
RUNNING UPHILL: NATURE’S
RESISTANCE TRAINING
If lifting weights isn’t for you, try another form of resistance
training—hill running. During hill running, your body weight is the
resistance. There is some evidence that running hills can
produce improvements in running economy similar to those that
occur through normal resistance training. Of course, traditional
strength training and hill running don’t produce identical results.
You’ll still want to include upper-body resistance exercises as
part of your supplementary training program.
Running uphill requires that your legs propel your body weight
upward against gravity. Moreover, they do so under conditions
that more closely replicate racing conditions than does even the
most well-designed weight machine. Anecdotal evidence for the
benefits of hill running comes from the Kenyan and Ethiopian
runners of today and goes back to coaching legend Arthur
Lydiard and the great New Zealand runners of the 1960s and
1970s. The best runners in the world run hills day after day. Of
course, genetic factors separate elite runners from recreational
runners, but it certainly appears that hill training is an important
element that, unlike your genes, you can influence.
An advantage of hill running over lifting weights is that you
simultaneously build your cardiovascular system. As discussed
in chapter 1, doing short hill reps of 10 to 12 seconds on a
moderately steep hill will build muscle strength and power and
should improve your running economy. Short hill reps are
--- PAGE 158 ---
discussed further in chapter 8 and are included in the training
schedules.
EXERCISE 1: PUSH-UP
Description
How many: 12 repetitions
How it helps: Strengthens your chest, shoulders, and triceps; helps improve arm drive
when you are running powerfully (e.g., hills, finishing kick) and your ability to maintain good
upper-body form when tired
How to do it:
Start in the push-up position with your toes on the floor and your hands slightly wider than
shoulder-width apart. Engage your core (a).
Bend your elbows and lower your body down until your chest is just above the floor (b).
Push your body back to the start position. Repeat until you complete 12 repetitions.
Don’t dip your head toward the floor or allow your hips to sag during this exercise.
Your elbows should remain close to your sides to ensure your triceps are working.
EXERCISE 2: STEP-UP WITH KNEE RAISE
--- PAGE 159 ---
Description
How many: 8 repetitions per leg
How it helps: Strengthens your glutes, quadriceps, hamstrings, and calf muscles; opens up
your chest and encourages an upright running posture; improves your balance and
increases the forward power of each stride, increasing your stride length
How to do it:
Stand approximately one step back from a bench or sturdy chair a bit lower than knee
height (typically 14-18 in. [36-46 cm]) or the second step of a flight of stairs.
Engage your core and place your left foot up on the bench, with the whole of the foot flat on
the surface of the bench.
Rise up onto the ball of your right foot, and keep your head up; this is the start position for
every repetition (a).
Push powerfully through your right foot to straighten your left leg while driving your left arm
forward and raising your right leg until your thigh is parallel to the ground (b). Complete 8
repetitions with your left leg on the bench and then switch legs.
Try to keep your upper body erect, and swing your arms in a natural running motion in
coordination with the opposite leg.
EXERCISE 3: CALF RAISE
--- PAGE 160 ---
Description
How many: 12 repetitions
How it helps: Strengthens your calf muscles and Achilles tendon; improves the toe-off
phase of your stride; reduces injury risk
How to do it:
Stand on the edge of a stair or stable box with your heels hanging over the edge (a).
Rise up onto your toes, bringing your heels upward (b). Hold the raised position for 2 to 3
seconds.
Lower your heels slowly until you reach the end of your comfortable range of motion.
Repeat until you complete 12 repetitions.
Notes: To increase the difficulty of this exercise, you can hold light dumbbells in each hand.
To emphasize working your calf eccentrically, lower yourself slowly on one leg and then rise
up using both legs.
EXERCISE 4: BENCH DIP
--- PAGE 161 ---
Description
How many: 12 repetitions
How it helps: Strengthens your shoulders and triceps; increases your ability to maintain
upright running posture when tired
How to do it:
Sit on the edge of a bench or chair, with your feet flat on the floor and your hands holding
the bench or chair beside your hips. Move your hips forward so they are just off the edge
(a).
Lower your hips straight down toward the floor by bending your elbows (b).
Push back up to the start position, and repeat until you complete 12 repetitions.
To make the exercise more difficult, move your feet farther away from the bench.
EXERCISE 5: LUNGE
--- PAGE 162 ---
Description
How many: 12 repetitions per leg
How it helps: Strengthens your quadriceps, hamstrings, and glutes; improves balance
between your left and right legs; helps develop the ability to control high forces through your
legs and maintain form while running downhill
How to do it:
Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart, your core engaged, and your toes pointing
straight ahead.
Hold two light dumbbells by your sides, and keep your upper body vertical with your head
up (a). Select a weight so the last few reps are difficult but you are not straining to complete
12 repetitions.
In one movement, take a big step forward with your left leg, and lower your right knee
toward the floor (b).
Push powerfully off the heel of your left foot to return to a standing position.
Perform the next repetition with your right leg, alternating until you complete 12 repetitions
with each leg.
EXERCISE 6: TRICEPS PRESS
--- PAGE 163 ---
Description
How many: 12 repetitions
How it helps: Strengthens your triceps muscles along the back of your upper arms; helps
maintain relaxed arm action when fatigued
How to do it:
Stand or sit holding one dumbbell above your head with both hands (a). Select a weight so
the last few reps are difficult, but you are not straining to complete 12 repetitions.
While keeping your upper arms vertical, bend at the elbows and lower the dumbbell behind
your head as shown (b).
Return to the start position, and repeat until you complete 12 repetitions.
EXERCISE 7: SQUAT
--- PAGE 164 ---
Description
How many: 12 repetitions
How it helps: Strengthens your quadriceps, hamstrings, glutes, lower back, and calves;
improves your ability to keep your knee in good alignment with your hip and ankle, which
reduces injury risk and improves running efficiency; also helps develop triple extension
(ankle, knee, and hip), which is an important feature of good running technique
How to do it:
Stand with your feet shoulder-width apart and toes pointing slightly outwards.
Hold a light dumbbell with both hands under your chin (a). Select a weight so the last few
reps are difficult, but you are not straining to complete 12 repetitions.
Engage your core and glutes. Initiate the squat by moving your hips backward as if you are
sitting down on a seat.
As you push your hips backward, you’ll be forced to lean forward slightly to keep from falling
over.
Lower your body without losing your balance until your thighs are horizontal to the floor (b),
then push up through your heels to return to a standing position.
Repeat until you complete 12 repetitions.
During the movement, keep your head up and eyes looking ahead. Make sure that your
knees are aligned with your feet and stay the same distance apart throughout the exercise.
--- PAGE 165 ---
RUNNING FORM DRILLS
Your running style is determined by your biomechanics, including the
length of your bones, your muscle and tendon flexibility, the strength and
endurance of various muscles, and the coordinated contraction pattern of
your muscles and the resulting movement of your limbs. Because everyone
has a unique physical makeup, there is no ideal or perfect form.
By performing the flexibility and strength-training exercises outlined
earlier in this chapter, you balance your body to improve your running form
and the ability to maintain form during the marathon. Stride length, for
example, is almost always determined naturally by your physiological
makeup and is best improved by increasing strength and flexibility. Other
examples include excessive forward lean at the waist, which can be
overcome by strengthening the gluteal and abdominal muscles, and trunk
instability, which can be improved through the core exercises provided in
this chapter.
But there’s something else you can do to improve your form. You’ve
probably seen sprinters doing various combinations of high-knee running,
butt kicks, skipping, and so on. Several of these drills are great for distance
runners too. First, these exercises can improve your coordination and
running form. Second, they lead to gains in strength endurance that allow
you to maintain your stride length throughout a race. By concentrating on a
high-knee lift; a complete toe-off; good arm drive; a relaxed neck with the
head positioned over the body; relaxed shoulders, arms, and hands; minimal
vertical movement (not bouncing with each stride); and an upright posture
(not leaning too far forward), you will improve your ability to hold good
running form and maximize your running efficiency. When you consider
how even a slight flaw in your form will be magnified over the course of a
marathon, and when you add the likely scenario of your form, no matter
how good, faltering in the last few miles of a marathon, it should be clear
that working on your running technique can help you be a faster
marathoner.
When doing drills, the key is to exaggerate various aspects of the
running stride and to concentrate on maintaining your form as you begin to
--- PAGE 166 ---
fatigue. This attention to different parts of your running gait will, over time,
become ingrained and pay dividends late in your marathon.
There are endless drills you could do; we’ve selected three that will help
your marathoning. They’ll help you maintain your stride length and lessen
your ground-contact time, two aspects of running form that can deteriorate
with lots of relatively slow marathon training.
Do drills when you are warmed up but still fresh—there is no use trying
to improve your coordination and technique when you are already tired.
You’ll notice benefits if you do them regularly—at least once, and
preferably twice, per week. A good way to incorporate drills easily into
your routine is to do them before a session of strides and before harder
workouts such as tempo runs and V O2max sessions. Performing drills as
part of your warm-up for those workouts will help you feel better
coordinated and ready to run fast during those efforts.
Perform the drills as a circuit; that is, do one repetition of each, and then
repeat the sequence. Do one repetition of each drill for about 20 seconds,
and rest before the next one by walking back to the starting point. Visualize
yourself completing the drill perfectly.
SKIP MARCH WALK
--- PAGE 167 ---
Description
How to do it:
Engage your core and march on the balls of your feet using small steps.
Raise one knee to hip level so your thigh is parallel to the ground, with your foot dorsiflexed
(parallel to the ground).
Rise on the toes of the other foot, straightening your back leg.
Your trunk should be held upright, with your chest out and shoulders back.
Keep your head still and neck relaxed.
Remaining on the balls of your feet, march forward, swinging your arms forward and back in
an exaggerated running motion.
Keep your shoulders, arms, and hands relaxed.
This exercise prepares you for skip march run.
SKIP MARCH RUN (AKA A-SKIP)
--- PAGE 168 ---
Description
How to do it:
Adopt the same start posture as for skip march walk.
Follow the same posture and movements as for skip march walk, but increase your leg and
arm drive to a more exaggerated skipping motion. Swing your arms in a natural running
motion, and keep the foot on your raised leg dorsiflexed (parallel to the ground).
KICKOUT (AKA B-SKIP)
--- PAGE 169 ---
Description
How to do it:
This drill is a version of skip march run (or A-skip) with leg extension. Follow the same
posture and movements as for skip march run.
Raise one knee (a), and as the knee approaches hip level, straighten the knee to nearly full
extension. (Your leg will end up nearly horizontal.)
Allow your momentum to carry your body forward (b), and skip off your back leg before
stepping forward (c) to repeat with the other leg.
Hold your trunk upright with your head still. Swing your arms in a natural running motion,
and keep the foot on your raised leg dorsiflexed (parallel to the ground).
This drill is challenging, particularly at first, but stay with it as it will signal areas of tightness
or weakness for you to work on. As you become more adept at the movement over time,
progress to a higher skip while performing the kickouts.
AEROBIC CROSS-TRAINING
Predictable training errors, such as increasing mileage or adding speed work
too quickly, lead to the majority of running injuries. With thoughtful
planning, the risk of running injuries can be reduced through modifying risk
--- PAGE 170 ---
factors. One way to do this is to reduce pounding on your legs and back by
substituting cross-training for a portion of your running.
The primary reason to cross-train is to provide additional cardiovascular
fitness without increasing the repetitive wear and tear associated with
running. Cross-training indoors can also be useful when the weather or
pollution levels prevent you from running outside. Unfortunately, many
runners cross-train only when injured and then return exclusively to running
as soon as the injury recovers. Sure, cross-training is highly effective for
maintaining fitness during times of injury, but that shouldn’t be the only
time most runners do it. If you’re careful about increases in mileage and
intensity, the surfaces you run on, and so on, and you still can’t consistently
reach the level of weekly mileage you’d like, you should incorporate cross-
training into your training program year-round.
No form of cross-training is a perfect substitute for running because your
body adapts very specifically to training. Though you will gain
cardiovascular benefits from cross-training, your neuromuscular system
will not make equivalent gains because the movement patterns are different.
That’s OK, however, because cross-training should be viewed as a
supplement to, not a direct replacement for, your running. Aerobic cross-
training is an effective substitute for some of the prescribed recovery runs in
our training schedules. The advantage of using it for recovery training is
that the increased blood flow improves your recovery without increasing
the cumulative impact forces on your body. Runners who have a history of
mileage-related injury may also benefit by substituting a portion of their
general aerobic conditioning with aerobic cross-training.
Apples and Oranges?
But won’t your racing performances suffer if you replace some of your
running with cross-training? The principle of specificity of training states
that your body adapts very specifically to the type of training you do. That’s
why you won’t have much success as a runner by doing all your training on
the bike or in the pool. But if the majority of your training is running, you
can enhance your running performance by doing other types of aerobic
workouts.
--- PAGE 171 ---
Scientific evidence suggests that well-trained runners can maintain their
running performance when replacing recovery runs with cross-training. By
reducing the risk of injury, the cross-training runner may actually run more
consistently and be better prepared for their marathon than the running-only
marathoner.
Cross-training activities that work the large muscle groups of the legs
(e.g., cycling, elliptical or arc training, stepmill or stair-climber, deep-water
running, and cross-country skiing) and have a similar alternate leg pattern
to running are the most effective substitutes for recovery runs (Jensen et al.
2019). Activities less similar to running (e.g., rowing) are generally less-
effective substitutes. Many runners combine a couple of different exercise
modes into the same session, for example 45 minutes total consisting of 25
minutes cycling and 20 minutes on an elliptical trainer or arc trainer.
Although the evidence suggests that cross-training can lead to
maintaining or even improving performance in well-trained runners, no
scientific evidence exists concerning cross-training for elite runners, and the
specificity-of-training principle likely becomes more critical the higher the
level of performance. Over the past decade, however, increasing numbers of
elite runners, particularly those with a history of previous injury, have made
aerobic cross-training part of their regular training routine.
Four ways to cross-train that have reasonably similar movement patterns
to running and should transfer to improvements in performance are cycling,
deep-water running, using an elliptical trainer (or its close relative the arc
trainer) or elliptical bike, and cross-country skiing (Jensen et al. 2019).
Let’s look at the benefits of these types of cross-training for marathon
runners. We’ll also discuss swimming, which, although doesn’t closely
simulate running, is not weight-bearing, works the cardiovascular system,
and is an excellent whole-body exercise.
Cycling
Cycling offers many options in that you can ride a bike outdoors, use your
bike on an indoor trainer, or use an exercise bike at home or at a gym. An
advantage of cycling is that it works the cardiovascular system while
eliminating the impact forces that cause most running injuries. You can,
therefore, add cycling to your training program with little risk of bringing
--- PAGE 172 ---
on typical running injuries. An advantage of cycling outside is that you get
to cover ground and feel the wind on your face, just as in running.
The downsides of cycling include the risk of getting hit by a car, the
large amount of time required compared with running, and the risk of
decreasing your stride length. The first downside is all too possible,
particularly for runners with good cardiovascular fitness but poor bike-
handling skills. In a low-traffic area, cycling outdoors is a great option, but
if you’re limited to cycling in an urban area without bike paths, you may
want to stay with the more boring indoor options. Indoor riding is also a
more realistic choice in many areas if you’re training during the winter for a
spring marathon. Even most dedicated cyclists forgo outside rides when the
temperature is below freezing.
Riding indoors can be a surprisingly satisfying experience because you
can concentrate on your workout without distractions or dangers such as
traffic lights and cars. During times of injury, an indoor bike can also be
used for higher-intensity training, such as lactate-threshold (LT) or V O2max
training. If a long-term injury puts you on the bike for multiple weeks, there
are many workout apps and simulators to help pass the time productively.
Getting a similar workout to running requires about three times as long
on a bike. But because the main rationale for recovery runs is simply to
increase blood flow through the muscles, you can replace a 30-minute
recovery run with about 45 minutes on the bike.
Because cycling is highly repetitive and uses a limited range of motion,
too much cycling tends to shorten your stride. You can minimize this
concern by walking briskly for several minutes after cycling and then
stretching your hamstrings, quadriceps, and hip flexors. Also, be sure to
keep the bike in an easy-enough gear with a pedaling rate of at least 90
RPM so that cycling doesn’t detract from your running turnover.
Water Running
Unfortunately, a number of running injuries are aggravated by some types
of cross-training. Fortunately, with most running injuries, you can safely
run in the water. Deep-water running with a flotation vest or belt provides
an excellent training stimulus and simulates land running more closely than
most other cross-training options. Running in the water is a total-body
--- PAGE 173 ---
exercise that works your legs, trunk, and arms and positively stresses your
cardiovascular system.
Various studies have verified that runners can use deep-water running to
maintain aerobic fitness, LT, running economy, and time-trial performance
for at least 6 weeks (Azevedo et al. 2010, Killgore 2012). This research
complements more than 30 years of practical evidence that runners can
maintain fitness and return to racing form quickly by water running during
injury.
Water-running technique is an area of some debate. Some coaches insist
that you should try to simulate land-running form as closely as possible.
Though that’s a nice ideal, it needs to be balanced with maintaining your
training intensity. Doing so will likely lead to moderate adjustment to your
running technique so you run more like a sprinter, driving your legs and
arms powerfully through the water.
Regardless of your running form, your stride rate will be slower during
water running because of the increased resistance of moving your legs
through water. If you try to simulate land running too closely, your stride
rate will be even slower. For that reason, don’t worry if you don’t bring
your leg behind your body to the same degree as in land running; just find a
happy compromise with decent form and a reasonable rate of leg turnover.
Some athletes move forward while running in the water and (very
slowly) do laps during their workouts. Whether you move forward or
remain relatively still depends on subtle changes in body position. Try to
maintain a relatively upright posture during water running; this posture will
work your trunk muscles, and you may find that you slowly move forward
through the water.
You probably won’t reach as high a heart rate running in the water as
when running on land. Depending on your experience with deep-water
running (like most things, you will get better at it with practice) and the
water temperature (heart rate tends to be lower the colder the water), your
heart rate will likely be about 5 to 10 percent lower for the same oxygen
uptake when running in water compared with normal running (Svedenhag
and Seger 1992; Azevedo et al. 2010; Killgore 2012). Lower heart rates
during water running are primarily because of the pressure of water on the
body; the water pressure makes more blood return to the heart so that more
blood is pumped with each heartbeat. Even runners with experience deep-
--- PAGE 174 ---
water running find it difficult physically and mentally to do more than about
70 minutes, so if you’re injured don’t plan to fully replicate your usual
running volume.
Using the estimate that heart rates during water running are about 5 to 10
percent lower than during land running, you can use the heart rate zones in
table 1.2 in chapter 1 and adjust accordingly. For example, when replacing a
recovery run, you would work hard enough to get your heart rate up to 70 to
75 percent of max heart rate (60-66 percent of heart rate reserve). When
injured and trying to maintain fitness, you would make the appropriate
adjustments for other types of workouts (but note that even when working
very hard, you are unlikely to get up to the V O2max heart rate zone).
Interestingly, studies have found that women tend to have slightly lower
heart rates and oxygen consumption than do men during deep-water
running, so adjust the deep-water training zones down by an additional 3 to
5 beats per minute. This is thought to be because of women’s generally
higher body fat content and resultant greater buoyancy as compared with
men.
Perceived exertion is higher during water running for a given heart rate
or level of oxygen consumption. In other words, to get a beneficial workout
in the water, you’ll feel that you’re working harder than during land
running. (We can speak from experience that perceived effort at a given
heart rate in the water is much higher than for the same heart rate running
on land.)
For this reason, if you’re injured and replacing land running with water
running, you’ll need to emphasize interval workouts in the water. If you do
only steady water-running sessions, your effort won’t be high enough to
maintain your fitness. Interval sessions in the water, however, give you brief
breaks, both physical and mental, that allow you to work harder and obtain
a superior workout. Another plus is that time passes relatively quickly when
you’re doing intervals, whereas steady water running is terribly boring.
A typical 40-minute water-running workout for recovery or to maintain
fitness when injured consists of a 5-minute warm-up followed by 10
repetitions of 45 seconds moderately hard with a 15-second recovery, a 1-
minute rest break, and then 10 repetitions of 1 minute 40 seconds
moderately hard with 20 seconds’ recovery, and a 4-minute cool-down. A
--- PAGE 175 ---
more challenging 50-minute workout consists of a 5-minute warm-up,
followed by 10 repetitions of 1 minute 40 seconds moderately hard with 20
seconds’ recovery, a 1-minute rest break, and then 6 repetitions of 2 minutes
30 seconds hard with 30 seconds’ recovery, and a 6-minute cool-down.
Even if you’re just using water running on your recovery days while
marathon training, you’ll probably need to concentrate on maintaining
intensity more than if you were going for an easy run around the block.
Elliptical Training (Indoors or Elliptical Bikes)
Elliptical training provides an excellent cardiovascular workout and can be
done on an indoor trainer or outdoors using an elliptical bike such as an
ElliptiGO. While there are many indoor elliptical trainers to choose from,
the two main categories are standard elliptical trainers that use an elliptical
path of motion and arc trainers that use an arc-like path of motion. As with
other forms of cross-training, either type of trainer will feel more natural in
your tenth session than your first session. You may find one type more
comfortable than the other or try alternating between them. Both types of
trainers work your legs and hips in a pattern that is reasonably similar to
running and also develops your upper body. Elliptical training and arc
training have low impact forces so can be used while recovering from a
variety of running injuries. If you’re healthy, elliptical training can
substitute for recovery runs or some general aerobic runs. Toward the end
of his career, Meb Keflezighi used an ElliptiGO for this purpose, which he
credits for helping him win the Boston Marathon and making his fourth
Olympic team in his late 30s and early 40s. Elliptical bikes can also be used
for LT training or uphill intervals, which is one reason they have become
popular with elite runners to supplement their running training.
Cross-Country Skiing
Cross-country skiing provides cardiovascular benefits equal to, or even
slightly better than, those associated with running. The whole-body nature
of cross-country skiing really works the cardiovascular system, and some of
the highest V O2max values have been recorded in cross-country skiers.
Running friends in New England, upstate New York, Colorado, and
Minnesota use cross-country skiing during the winter months for enjoyable
--- PAGE 176 ---
variety and to reduce the stress of fitting in runs when the roads are
treacherous.
If you know how to do it, cross-country skiing is pretty much the perfect
form of cross-training. Unfortunately, cross-country skiing also requires
skill and is only available for part of the year. Highly trained runners with
no experience or little coordination may not be able to go fast enough for
long enough while skiing to get in a good workout. After a few weeks,
however, cross-country technique feels more natural and efficient, and an
hour or so of skiing passes quickly. Cross-country ski machines are a good
option too but are not as much fun as gliding along the snow.
Swimming
Swimming can be an enjoyable form of cross-training that works the
cardiovascular system with absolutely none of the jarring stress of running.
To get in a decent workout requires some skill, but with a little bit of
instruction or watching technique videos online, even an uncoordinated
marathoner with scant buoyancy can quickly build up to a workout of up to
an hour. Repeats of 50 to 200 yards (or 50-200 m) will work your
cardiovascular system and break up the workout into chunks that help you
accumulate more aerobic training. Using more than one stroke—such as
swimming freestyle most of the time but periodically including breaststroke
and backstroke—provides variety and reduces specific muscle fatigue.
Using kickboards and pull buoys also adds variety and can help you put in
more aerobic work. Swimming isn’t as similar to running as some of the
other cross-training options, but if most of your training still consists of
running, that doesn’t really matter. Swimming is a great way to increase
your recovery and your general aerobic fitness without increasing your risk
of a running-related injury.
In this chapter, we looked at several types of training that build on the
solid foundations of marathon preparation we discussed in chapters 1 to 3.
The principles laid out in these chapters apply to all marathoners. How best
to apply those principles, however, can change as you age. In the next
chapter, we’ll look at how marathoners over the age of 40 can balance
accommodating age with ambitious training and racing goals.
--- PAGE 177 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 178 ---
T
5
ADVANCED MARATHONING
FOR MASTERS RUNNERS
Description
his chapter looks at aging and running performance and offers
practical recommendations on how to stay healthy while continuing
to chase ambitious marathon goals. As in the rest of this book, our
--- PAGE 179 ---
advice is based on a combination of sport science, elite best practices, and
personal experience as runners and advisors to runners.
Older runners have greatly varying levels of running experience,
backstories, and injury histories. The right training for a 55-year-old
marathoner who has run 30 marathons and has a history of lower back pain
will differ substantially from that for a 40-year-old newcomer. The common
thread is that any advice must be tailored to the context of the individual.
As an older marathoner, how close can you get to your earlier times? The
answer depends on the degree to which you’re already training hard and
intelligently, whether you have a lifestyle that optimizes your recovery, and
your genetics. If you’re doing everything really well now, your running
performances will likely slow gradually with the passing years. The rate of
slowing tends to be about 1 percent per year across all runners but may vary
considerably for you. Having said that, we have yet to meet a masters
runner who can’t improve some aspect of their training or lifestyle to help
their running. The good news is that if you alter your training to provide the
right stimulus to achieve your racing goals and improve aspects of your
lifestyle, such as your sleep pattern and diet, you’ll likely improve your
running performance from its current level, regardless of your age.
SLOWING THE RATE OF SLOWING
Looking at data on running records by age, professors Ray Fair and Edward
Kaplan of Yale University have calculated how much endurance running
performance (5K through marathon) tends to decline with increasing age
(Fair and Kaplan, 2018). The rate of slowing is very close to 1 percent per
year between ages 40 and 45, increasing moderately to 1.3 percent per year
between ages 65 and 70, and then increasing progressively more with
advancing age. Unfortunately, their data uses only men’s results, but
reviewing the women’s marathon records shows a similar slowing with age
(about 1.3 percent per year between ages 40 and 60). The slightly greater
slowing for older age groups of both genders is likely due, at least in part, to
the relatively small number of athletes competing in those age groups. In
the coming decades, we can expect the 70-plus records to keep falling.
--- PAGE 180 ---
Savvy older runners can maintain their running performance for a long
time. Let’s look at four issues for older runners and how to modify your
training and lifestyle to stem the impacts on your marathon goal.
Issue 1: V O2max Decreases
In chapter 1, we discussed the three key physiological measures for
marathoners: V O2max, lactate threshold (LT), and running economy. Of
these, V O2max is most likely to decrease with age. If you maintain your
level of training over the years, running economy remains relatively steady,
and LT pace tends to slow very gradually. In contrast, even experienced
distance runners tend to have a decrease of about 0.5 to 1 percent in
V O2max per year after the age of 40 (Brisswalter and Nosaka 2013;
Reaburn and Dascombe 2008; Suominen 2011).
What causes this decrease in V O2max? Remember that V O2max is
determined by how much oxygenated blood can be pumped to and then
extracted by your working muscles. As you age, your maximal heart rate
slowly declines (on average, about 0.7 beats per minute per year), you tend
to lose muscle mass, and the amount of blood your heart can pump with
each beat (stroke volume) tends to decrease. Each of these changes means
less blood delivered to and used by your working muscles.
What to Do About It
A decreased maximal heart rate is a contributing factor, but the decline in
V O2max is largely due to the tendency to do less high-intensity running as
we get older. A study involving masters running at around marathon
intensity found that the best predictors for current speed were their overall
mileage over the previous three years and their peak aerobic power, also
known as V O2max (Lee, Snyder, and Lundstrom 2020). Even moderate
changes in training patterns over time lead to a reduction in V O2max, so
fight back by including specific V O2max training in your marathon
preparation. The schedules in this book include workouts with hard efforts
of about 2 to 6 minutes’ duration at 5K race pace to stimulate increases in
V O2max.
If you haven’t recently been doing this type of training, you can enhance
your marathon preparation by including V O2max workouts before
beginning the 12-week or 18-week schedules in chapters 9 through 12. If
--- PAGE 181 ---
you haven’t done such workouts in a while, be sure to do a thorough warm-
up, and start with fewer repeats (e.g., 4 repeats of 1 kilometer instead of 6)
in your first few sessions.
Issue 2: Body Composition Changes
Your body composition includes both how muscular you are and how much
fat you have stored. If it seems harder to maintain a muscular and lean body
composition as the years go by, that’s because it is. Starting in a person’s
30s, the tendency is to gradually lose muscle mass and store more fat.
Some of this transformation stems from hormonal changes in both
women and men that make it harder to retain muscle and easier to put on
fat. Decreases in growth hormone, testosterone, and estrogen are the main
bodily culprits behind reduced muscle mass. Lower testosterone levels in
men allow the enzyme lipoprotein lipase to store more body fat. Women
also tend to store more fat as their estrogen levels decrease after
menopause. The consequences of these hormonal changes aren’t dramatic
in any one year but can accrue over time such that you might feel (and look)
dramatically different at age 60 compared to age 40.
Training tendencies also contribute to reduced muscularity. Older
runners often shift away from high-intensity exercise. Endurance training
keeps you fit but isn’t very good for maintaining muscle mass. Fast-twitch
muscle fibers in particular tend to atrophy as you age. Even though you’re
running regularly, this phenomenon occurs in your leg muscles, just at a
slower rate than for your sedentary friends. The decrease in muscle mass is
associated with decreases in muscle strength and power and reduced
V O2max with age.
Your resting metabolic rate also tends to decrease with age due to both
the natural aging process and the tendency toward decreased muscle mass,
so you burn fewer calories just hanging around.
What to Do About It
The best approach here is twofold: strategies to help retain and build
muscle, and strategies to slow the increase in body fat. (Some of these
strategies overlap.)
To retain muscle as you age, you need to do purposeful resistance
training. This resistance training can take the form of strength training or
--- PAGE 182 ---
running against resistance (i.e., fast running and uphill running). Strength
training builds muscle and has the added benefit of stimulating the release
of growth hormone and testosterone. As discussed further below, adequate
protein intake will help ensure your muscle-building efforts pay dividends.
The other side of the body composition equation is reducing (or simply
maintaining) body fat levels. Factors include the calories you burn through
exercise and the calories you take in through your diet. If you reduce your
running mileage over time, you’ll put on fat unless you increase other forms
of exercise or modify your diet. With high-intensity exercise, you continue
to burn calories after your workout due to excess postexercise oxygen
consumption. (That is, your metabolic rate tends to remain elevated after
high-intensity workouts such as V O2max sessions.)
Another factor concerning energy balance is how active you are outside
of running. Some experts use the phrase “active couch potatoes” to describe
people who, aside from their planned workouts, are just as sedentary as the
bulk of the population. This phenomenon tends to increase with age as
everyday responsibilities eat up more time and increased fatigue makes
sitting usually seem like the best choice. If you struggle with maintaining a
good running weight, try being more active throughout the day, such as by
taking frequent short walks and breaking up work with brief bouts of body-
weight exercises. Staying more active provides another good reason to do
the strengthening exercises recommended in chapter 4 because they both
build muscle and increase your calorie burn.
As discussed in chapter 2, a high-quality diet sets the stage for adapting
well to training. A high-quality diet also leaves you feeling more satisfied
and reduces the urge to overindulge. We’re not saying to count every calorie
and obsess over the nutritional content of everything you eat. (We love our
ice cream!) But why not eat in such a way that you get the most benefit
from the hard work you do in training? By eating a well-balanced diet and
avoiding highly processed foods, you give yourself the best chance of
absorbing your training and maintaining your fat levels as you age, even
though other factors, such as reduced resting metabolic rate and hormonal
changes, are gradually working against you.
Issue 3: Reduced Stride Length
--- PAGE 183 ---
Your running speed is determined by your stride length and stride rate (i.e.,
strides per minute). One way to understand why running performance
decreases with age is to look at how these two parameters change. Older
runners tend mostly to maintain their stride rate with age. Stride length,
however, tends to shorten, sometimes significantly.
Why does stride length decrease with age? Research points primarily to
reduced power at the ankle, leading to lower forward propulsive force
(Devita et al., 2016). The reduction in ankle power is likely due to
decreased strength, reduced mitochondrial function, and a decrease in the
number of motor neurons in the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles in the
calf. Both of these muscles attach to your calcaneus (heel bone) via the
Achilles tendon, so reduced elasticity of this important tendon may also
contribute to a reduction in stride length. In addition to decreased strength,
there’s usually a tendency to lose power—that is, strength applied over time
—because of rarely doing movements like bounding and hopping. Put
another way, even if you haven’t lost much lower-leg strength, you can lose
the ability to make dynamic use of it.
What to Do About It
Developing more ankle power may help maintain stride length for older
runners, thereby reducing the decline in running performance. You can
increase ankle power by increasing the strength endurance of your
gastrocnemius and soleus muscles and by increasing the effectiveness of the
stretch-shortening cycle of these muscles. These goals can be met through
specific types of running training as well as by exercises that strengthen
your calves (see step-ups and calf raises in the strength training program in
chapter 4) and exercises that work on the stretch-shortening ability of your
calves and Achilles tendon (see running form drills in chapter 4). The bent-
leg and straight-leg calf stretches in the flexibility program in chapter 4 can
also improve your ankle flexibility.
There are two types of running training that improve ankle power. The
first type is running short hill reps (as discussed in chapters 1 and 4 and
included in the training schedules), in which you use your calf muscles to
sprint up a moderate hill. The second is running strides (as discussed in
chapter 1 and included in the training schedules), in which you accelerate
powerfully on the flat. As with any modifications to training, be cautious in
--- PAGE 184 ---
increasing these elements to avoid injury; start gently and increase
gradually.
Issue 4: Increased Recovery Time
The muscular damage and fatigue you experience after a hard workout or
race as a masters runner is likely similar to what you experienced as a
younger runner. Not surprisingly, however, the vast majority of older
runners find that recovery from hard efforts now takes longer.
Although the slower muscle recovery in older runners isn’t well
understood, hormone levels play a significant role. A variety of hormones
(including human growth hormone, testosterone, and estrogen) regulate the
repair of muscle fibers and tendons. As hormone levels decline with age,
muscle repair and regeneration slow, and the balance between muscle
protein synthesis and breakdown changes. After many years of running,
accumulated scar tissue in your muscles and connective tissue may also
slow your ability to bounce back for another hard effort.
What to Do About It
There are two categories of changes you can make to speed your recovery.
The first is to do all of the little things right to improve your body’s ability
to recover quickly. The second is to modify your training to allow more
recovery time between key workouts. Let’s look at each of these strategies
in turn.
Older marathoners should pay special attention to the discussion in
chapter 3 on optimizing recovery. We can well attest that less-than-ideal
choices about training, stretching, diet, sleep, and so on take far more of a
toll now than they did when we were in our late 20s. If you want to
continue to aim high as a marathoner in middle age and beyond, we salute
you. Maximize your chances of success by consistently doing the
nonrunning practices that younger runners often ignore.
Among the changes in lifestyle that can improve your recovery, the two
that stand out are getting adequate high-quality sleep and improving your
diet. As discussed in chapter 3, both the quality and quantity of your sleep
affect your ability to recover. A lack of high-quality sleep is associated with
overtraining and an inability to positively adapt to training. While it’s
important for all runners to get enough sleep, that’s particularly true for
--- PAGE 185 ---
older marathoners. Getting enough high-quality sleep increases the release
of growth hormone and testosterone, which have multiple positive effects
on your ability to recover, build muscle, maintain a lean body composition,
and generally reap the benefit of your training. See the sidebar “Sleep
Better, Run Faster” in chapter 3 for how to ensure you get enough high-
quality sleep.
Older runners can’t get away with dietary mistakes as they could when
they were younger. Key aspects of diet for older runners to focus on include
refueling soon after workouts, eating enough protein, rehydrating after
running, and avoiding excess alcohol. As discussed in chapters 2 and 3,
refueling quickly after hard workouts and races will allow you to recover
more quickly. This is particularly useful for the older marathoner. While
most Americans eat much more protein than their bodies require, older
people have moderately increased protein needs. Older runners should
check that they’re eating enough protein not only for muscle repair but also
to allow muscle building as they focus more on higher-intensity training.
As discussed in chapters 1 and 2, recovery is enhanced by replenishing
the dehydration that occurs during running. The thirst mechanism in older
people tends to be less sensitive, so older runners should pay a bit more
attention to replenishing hydration levels after training. Alcohol isn’t a
friend for older runners because it leads to dehydration, interferes with
sleep, and provides empty calories. It also slows recovery due to its effect
on the liver. The serious older marathoner should keep alcohol intake to a
minimum.
The other way to account for the need for increased recovery time after
hard workouts or races is to modify your training. All runners need easy
days after their key training sessions before they’re ready to benefit from
more hard work. Older marathoners, however, may require more or
different types of recovery days than younger runners.
If the training schedules in chapters 9 to 13 are too challenging, you can
adjust them either by skipping some of the harder workouts (which risks
meaning you’re not prepared for your marathon) or by extending the
schedules across more weeks. For example, the hard workouts in the 18-
week schedules could be accomplished across 20 or 21 weeks, and the 12-
week schedules could be extended across 14 or 15 weeks. In this way, you
get in the same amount of specific marathon preparation but with more
--- PAGE 186 ---
recovery to stay within your personal limits to adapt. Simply insert more
recovery days (running, cross-training, or days off) between the harder
workouts. Masters runners tend to choose cross-training (such as cycling or
elliptical training as discussed in chapter 4) or to simply have more days
completely off from training than younger runners.
Some runners also extend the concept of a week to 8 or 9 days to allow
enough recovery. Unfortunately, this strategy is difficult to implement for
many runners. First, it could mean often training alone—your running
buddies are unlikely to change their traditional Sunday long runs or
Tuesday track sessions. Second, it can easily conflict with a normal work
schedule, such as if you find your 9-day “week” means running 22 miles
before going to work on Wednesday morning. For these practical reasons,
we’ve received the most positive feedback from our older readers on
extending the number of weeks for their marathon preparation.
Kate Landau
Fastest marathon: 2:31:56 (Boston, 2019)
Marathon highlights: Overall women’s winner at Eugene,
Detroit, Portland, and elsewhere while a master
Almost all of Kate Landau’s marathon career has occurred
since she turned 40 in 2016. That’s not necessarily by design.
--- PAGE 187 ---
Description
Landau was a star runner in high school (third in the 1991
national cross-country championship) and college (second in
the 1996 NCAA 10,000 meters). Those accomplishments came
despite Landau battling anorexia. Landau tried to run
occasionally after graduating from Georgetown University in
1999, but her illness prevented consistency. After more than a
decade of struggle, in 2011 Landau committed to systematic
care for anorexia. She resumed regular running in 2013 once
she was healthy. As she started dabbling in shorter road races,
her natural ability resurfaced. In 2015, at age 39, she ran her
first marathon in Tacoma, Washington, where she had moved
after regaining her health. She placed second overall with a
time of 2:43:51, less than a minute behind the men’s winner.
Landau’s fastest marathons, including her personal best of
2:31:56, came a few years into her marathon career when she
was in her early 40s. She was the first masters finisher at the
2020 U.S. Olympic Trials, placing 14th against the best
Americans. Landau was then sidelined from racing marathons
for two years because of injuries. She’s still quite fast and
successful—she won the 2024 Eugene Marathon in 2:40:52 at
--- PAGE 188 ---
age 47, and a week later she placed second in Vancouver in
2:40:35.
But, Landau says, “PRs are definitely in my past. There’s
definitely a shift, and it’s hard mentally to accept that. I think the
transition from feeling like you still can run for PRs to not being
able to run for PRs is hard.”
Not that she’s become lackadaisical. Landau runs about 90
miles a week while working a demanding job as a physician
assistant in a vascular surgery practice. She works four 10-hour
days a week and one weekend a month, with all work time
spent on her feet. She’s also on call nine or ten days a month,
which often extends her work day beyond 10 hours. On work
days, she runs 9 or 10 miles at 5 a.m. She saves her longer
and harder runs, including long runs with large segments at
marathon race pace, for her nonwork days.
Landau has learned to set personally meaningful goals
beyond personal bests. She likes the challenge of undertakings
such as her Eugene and Vancouver double in the spring of
2024, or Chicago and Detroit on consecutive weekends in
October 2024. In training, she sets what she calls “small goals”
of bettering recent times for tempo runs while trying not to
compare those times to what she ran at her peak.
Two other changes have helped Landau stay healthy and
motivated. First, since overcoming her hamstring injury, “I made
an effort to slow down my easy runs. My easy runs prior to
2020 were 6:15-6:45 [per mile]. I now run 6:50-7:30 on easy
days,” which at the slower end is more than 20 percent slower
per mile than her current marathon race pace. Second, she
does two strength training sessions per week. Each session
lasts about 30 minutes and focuses on fewer repetitions with
heavier weights to counteract the muscle loss that occurs with
aging.
One last thing to learn from Landau: Even successful
masters marathoners are allowed to step away from the event if
they want to. “I have gotten my mile time down to 5:16
recently,” she says. “That’s much slower than my old mile
--- PAGE 189 ---
repeat times, but I have lost a lot of speed so those kinds of
goals are fun. I may try to work on speed a little after my next
two marathons and try to get close to 5:00 as a small goal.”
Roberta Groner
Fastest marathon: 2:29:09 (Rotterdam, 2019)
Marathon highlight: sixth in the 2019 World Championship
If you ran earlier in life, set it aside for a while, and then
returned to the sport, you’ll want to get to know Roberta Groner.
Description
Groner ran in high school and at Saint Francis University, but
she stopped during her senior year of college. She got married,
had three sons, and earned a nursing degree. But in 2009,
--- PAGE 190 ---
when her youngest son was 2 and she was 31, Groner decided
she needed a pursuit that was about her. She resumed running
to get some exercise. She soon got pulled back to the
competitive side of the sport.
At her first marathon, in 2011, she ran 3:12. Successes in
training and racing snowballed—2:57 at Boston in 2013, 2:45 at
New York City in 2015, 2:37 at the 2016 Mohawk-Hudson race.
Her big breakthrough came at California International in 2017.
At age 39, she placed second and lowered her personal best to
2:30. She improved her PR to 2:29:09 at Rotterdam in 2019.
That performance led her to being named to the U.S. team for
the 2019 World Athletics Championships in Doha, Qatar. In
oppressive heat and humidity, in a race that started at midnight,
Groner, then 41, patiently picked her way through the field to
place sixth overall and first American.
Throughout this remarkable run, Groner worked full-time as a
nurse and had part-time custody of her sons. She ran upward
of 100 miles a week while deep in marathon training, doing
most of her runs solo and often starting before 5 a.m. On other
days, she would run after dropping the boys off at school and
then squeeze in a short second run during her lunch break.
Groner’s schedule became less onerous in 2024. She
stepped away from nursing and became a full-time coach for
the Central Park Track Club. She has benefited not only from
not being busy every minute of every day but also from being
able to train more often with others. “I join the team for
workouts in the evenings, which has helped me tremendously,”
she says. “I’m able to push into a range that I can’t seem to do
while running alone.”
Because of taking that decade off from running after college,
Groner is younger in “running years” than she otherwise would
be. Still, she has made adjustments to account for being in her
late 40s.
“I’ve started to do more strength and core training,” Groner
says. “When I was in my 30s, I found it difficult to do more than
run, work, and take care of my family. Now that my children are
--- PAGE 191 ---
in college and high school, I have found more time to focus on
these. I also have focused more on sleep and recovery. I aim
for eight to nine hours of sleep a night, whereas in my 30s I
was getting six to seven hours. Also, incorporating bimonthly
deep-tissue massage and physical therapy sessions have
helped me stay healthy.”
Groner still hits 100-plus-mile weeks when marathon training.
And she’s still fast—she qualified for the 2024 U.S. Olympic
Marathon Trials by running 2:31 in Copenhagen at age 45.
Compared to her late 30s and early 40s, she has “maybe more
aches and pains, but overall I feel about the same,” she says.
The biggest internal change she’s noticed is that it takes her
longer to feel warmed up on everyday runs. She accounts for
this by starting her runs 30 to 45 seconds slower per mile than
the pace she plans to eventually hit.
“I’m still aiming to PR but know that realistically that it may
not happen again,” Groner says. “I really still try to compete and
show up at every race with the best intentions to give it my
best. Competing among the best women in the country and
world is what I thrive off of. I love to race and compete, and if a
PR or course PR happens, I’m happy.”
MORE KEYS TO SUCCESSFUL
MASTERS MARATHONING
Your likelihood of successful masters running can be increased by good
planning, a healthy dose of common sense, and discipline. Good planning
involves knowing how to adjust your training to accommodate your body’s
capacity to handle stress. It also includes aspects like wearing the right
shoes and wearing orthotics if you need them. A specialist running store
with experienced runners and a treadmill can help ensure you have shoes
that meet your needs. If necessary, a podiatrist experienced with runners can
fit you for custom orthotics. Be open to trying different makes and models
--- PAGE 192 ---
of running shoes as your body changes (i.e., you might benefit from more
cushioning than 20 years ago, your feet may have widened, and so on).
It might be tempting to do all of your runs in super shoes or nonplated,
high-stack rockered models that can make running feel more like it did
decades ago. Resist that temptation. For one thing, masters runners are
especially good candidates for warding off injuries by rotating among two
or more models each week. Also, masters runners tend to have more
hamstring and calf injuries than younger runners (McKean, Manson, and
Stanish 2006). Clinicians we know anecdotally report that super shoes and
their nonplated kin can place additional stress on these muscles. So, it
makes sense to use such shoes judiciously, such as for your hardest or
longest runs, and wearing more conventional trainers for your workaday
runs.
SCOTT’S APPROACH TO BEING A
HEALTHY MASTERS RUNNER
Every December I write down my main running goals for the
coming year. Thirty years ago, the goals usually had to do with
setting personal bests. Now that I’m in my 60s, I still have time-
related goals, and I often have completion goals, such as
finishing a specific trail ultramarathon. For the last several years,
however, my main goal has been the same: Lose no days of
running to injury. Focusing on this goal is how I get the most
satisfaction out of this phase of my running life.
My physical and mental health is best supported by
consistently running a decent amount; my current sweet spot is
between 2,500 and 3,000 miles a year. But I don’t want to just
blindly run up the odometer. I want those miles to be as
enjoyable as possible—I want to feel good running, and I want to
feel good about my running. That’s where “lose no days of
running to injury” comes in. Rather than the call to
obsessiveness it might sound like, it’s how I can best stay
healthy.
--- PAGE 193 ---
Like any good goal, this one is not just personally meaningful
but quantifiable and with obvious steps to take to reach it. Losing
no days to injury basically means taking care of myself—not
letting myself get too worn down by running or work, eating and
sleeping well, not gaining unneeded weight, and striving to
maintain a body that can hold up to the amount of running I want
to do.
That last point is where the goal really helps me. It means that
pretty much every day I do strengthening, core stability, balance,
or mobility exercises. Some I do immediately before and after
running, and others I do throughout the day. I still have my
trouble spots; I still wish I were a little more flowing when
running, and I still sometimes miss days to injury. (I don’t run if I
sense that I can’t do so with my normal gait—running in that
compromised state will both exacerbate the current issue and set
me up for compensatory problems elsewhere.) But as someone
who has already run more than 130,000 miles, committing to
doing nonrunning exercises daily has been the key to consistent,
enjoyable running for the last few decades.
Another practice I credit with meeting the miss-no-days goal is
having lots of variety in my running. That’s variety in terms of
distance, intensity, terrain, and topography. Most of my weeks
look a lot like a sample week from the training schedules later in
this book. I regularly mix long runs, short recovery days, tempo
runs, interval workouts, turnover sessions, and general aerobic
runs. It’s when I get away from multipace running—when I string
together too many medium-length, medium-intensity days—that I
start to feel flat, stiff, and achy. Thanks to all of the above, I’ve
had only three injuries requiring a week or more off from running
since I turned 40.
A bonus: When I do decide to focus on a competitive goal, the
default setting of variety sets me up well to quickly pivot to more
structured training. (Well, quickly for someone who has been
running more than 45 years.) I can be in decent road 5K shape
in a handful of weeks, or I can reasonably target a long trail race
two months hence. It will be from this baseline of well-rounded
--- PAGE 194 ---
fitness that I’ll build to meet a goal of running a road marathon in
my teens, 20s, and every decade on up to my 60s.
It doesn’t happen as often as it did 30 years ago, and certainly
not as often as I’d like, but at least a few times a month I have
what I call a “yes” run. I’ll realize I’m floating along, unburdened
by any physical or mental obstacles to being completely
absorbed in the moment. “Yes,” I think, and nothing more. I
usually have to force myself to start heading home. If putting a
little effort into bodily maintenance means I can regularly have
such runs, I’ll happily take that trade-off.
—Scott Douglas
Common sense involves not only listening to your body’s signals but
also accepting that the best way to heed those signals could be different
from when you were younger. In your 20s you could probably run through
sudden small aches and pains. Now it’s more likely that the same approach
will lead to the issue being noticeable before, during, and after running, and
you’ll realize your training has been compromised for the last few weeks.
Older runners simply have a smaller margin of error in finessing their way
through these situations.
It’s almost always best to err on the side of caution. If you feel an injury
coming on—especially one that gets worse the longer you run—don’t
delude yourself. Attempting to run through it will usually make the injury
worse; instead of one or two days off now, you might find yourself having
to miss weeks to recover. Cross-train until you feel you can run normally
and, if required, get some treatment.
Similarly, if you feel a chest cold coming on, don’t push through a
challenging run in the rain or snow. Instead, go home and get warm and,
hopefully, ward off a chest infection that might compromise your training
for several weeks.
Common sense also includes subtle modifications to your running
routine. The days of rolling out of bed and straight into an early-morning
run are over. (Not that doing so was ever a good idea, but the consequences
are likely to be much greater now.) If, as is common, your schedule requires
fitting in marathon training before work, include prerun prep time when
--- PAGE 195 ---
deciding when to wake. Use the dynamic flexibility warm-up described in
chapter 4 to ensure that you start your workout with good running form;
stiffly stumbling around the first few miles increases your risk of injury. In
addition, allow adequate time for a comprehensive warm-up before hard
workouts.
Common sense and discipline overlap in that the latter often means
making what you know are the right choices, even though in the moment
those choices aren’t as fun and carefree as you might wish they were.
Discipline for older marathoners also involves being dedicated about
maintaining your running body through regular flexibility, core stability,
and strength training work. If you have a more personalized program from a
physical therapist or other sports medicine professional, discipline entails
sticking to it even when the acute issue that led to seeing the professional
seems to have improved. As coach, author, and U.S. masters record-holder
Pete Magill puts it, if you think you don’t have the time for this ongoing
maintenance work, you will soon when you’re injured and can’t run.
Being a disciplined older runner isn’t just about avoiding injury
(although that should be a powerful enough inducement). Four-time
Olympian Meb Keflezighi maintained a high level of performance into his
40s by stretching before and after every run, doing core stability and
strengthening work almost daily, and performing running form drills six
days a week. Keflezighi also replaced some of his shorter recovery runs
with ElliptiGO rides so that he was better recovered for his key workouts.
You may not have as much time as Keflezighi did to focus on the little
things that help you run strong and injury-free, but within your personal
context you can show a similar level of discipline.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 196 ---
T
6
TAPERING FOR PEAK
MARATHON PERFORMANCE
raining provides the long-term improvements in fitness that are
necessary for marathon success. As you’re no doubt aware, training
also tends to leave you a bit tired most of the time. As we’ve noted,
this doesn’t mean you’re overtrained—a moderate amount of residual
--- PAGE 197 ---
fatigue is fine during the many weeks of training. The periodic recovery
weeks in your training schedule are designed to reduce but not totally
eliminate the accumulated fatigue of training.
When the marathon approaches, however, you need to cut back your
training for a more prolonged period so you’re optimally rested. Tapering
your training is critical for reaching the starting line in peak fitness and with
maximal energy reserves. The challenge during the last several weeks
leading up to the marathon is to find the best balance between continued
training (to be in the best possible racing shape) and resting (to eliminate
fatigue). In this chapter, we’ll look at the best way to strike that crucial
balance.
BENEFITS OF TAPERING
Put simply, tapering corrects the accumulated wear and tear of training.
More specifically, it appears that tapering leads to improvements in running
economy (how much oxygen you need to run at a given pace), muscle
strength, and power. As we saw in chapter 1, improvements in running
economy relate directly to improvements in marathon race pace, so tapering
is money in the bank in improving your marathon performance. Renowned
exercise physiologist Tim Noakes, MD, emphasizes that recovery of the
shock-absorbing function of the muscles is an important benefit of tapering
for marathon runners, which may explain the improvements in running
economy (Noakes 2003). Tapering allows repair of the ongoing
microcellular muscle damage from training, fully replenishes the glycogen
stores in your muscles and liver, and bolsters your immune system. Other
indicators of recovery from stress during tapering include decreases in
mood disturbance, positive changes in hormonal markers of stress, and
improved sleep (Bosquet et al. 2007; Mujika 2010). How much benefit you
gain from a taper likely depends on how much and for how long you have
ramped up your marathon training, as well as your individual capacity to
adapt and recover.
Scientific studies on tapering for distance runners typically find
performance improvements of 2 to 3 percent, which equates to about 3.5 to
--- PAGE 198 ---
5.5 minutes for a 3-hour marathon (Bosquet et al. 2007; Grivas 2018). The
potential gains from tapering are substantial.
HOW LONG SHOULD YOU TAPER?
Several studies investigating the relationship between racing performance at
various distances and taper duration concluded that the optimal length of a
taper is seven days to three weeks. For the marathon, the general consensus
is to taper for a minimum of two weeks, with three weeks being optimal.
Too short a taper will leave you tired on marathon day, whereas tapering for
too long will lead to a loss of fitness. When you consider that any one
workout will improve fitness by perhaps 1 percent, while a well-designed
taper can provide an improvement in race performance of several
percentage points, it’s wise to err on the side of tapering too much rather
than not enough. For the marathon, a well-designed three-week taper will
leave you optimally prepared and recovered for the race.
KEY PRINCIPLES FOR MARATHON
TAPERING
Begin tapering three weeks before your marathon.
Maintain training intensity.
Reduce mileage.
Make recovery days easy or take days off.
Optimize recovery strategies with proper diet and hydration.
Eliminate muscle tightness with stretching, recovery tools
(such as foam rollers), physical therapy (if required),
massage, and rest.
HOW SHOULD YOU REDUCE YOUR
TRAINING TO IMPROVE RACING
--- PAGE 199 ---
PERFORMANCE?
Both scientific and anecdotal evidence indicates that the key to effective
tapering is to substantially reduce your mileage while maintaining the
intensity of your training (Mujika 2010; Grivas 2018). Reducing the amount
you run reduces accumulated fatigue to improve your marathon
performance, and interspersing efforts throughout your buildup, including
V O2max intervals and strides, maintains the adaptations you have worked
hard to gain over the past several months. During your taper, you should do
shorter sessions at those efforts, so while you’re maintaining the intensity of
training, you’re still reducing the quantity of higher-intensity training. We
also recommend a tune-up race two weeks before the marathon as a key
session for putting the final polish on your racing fitness (and, ideally,
providing psychological reinforcement that you’re almost ready to roll).
How much you reduce your overall mileage depends on your current
training volume, past experience (know thyself), and overall health. In
general, older runners tend to require slightly more time to taper than
younger runners. Based on research, many discussions with elite
marathoners and coaches, and personal experience, we recommend the
following for cutting back your mileage:
Third week before the marathon: Reduce mileage by 20 to 30
percent.
Second week before the marathon: Reduce mileage by 40 percent.
Marathon week (six days before race): Reduce mileage by 65
percent.
For example, a marathoner whose training peaks at 70 miles (113 km)
per week would reduce mileage by about 20 to 30 percent (to 49 to 56 miles
[79 to 90 km]) in the third week before the race, by about 40 percent (to 42
miles [68 km]) the following week, and by about 65 percent (to 28 miles
[45 km]) during race week. For race week, the 65 percent mileage reduction
is for the six days leading up to the marathon.
Emily Sisson
--- PAGE 200 ---
Fastest marathon: 2:18:29 (2022 Chicago Marathon)
Marathon highlights: second in the 2022 Chicago Marathon,
second in the 2024 U.S. Olympic Trials
Emily Sisson is a refreshing reminder that the bulk of
marathoning success comes from mastering the basics rather
than obsessing over “hacks” and “secrets.”
Description
Take, for example, Sisson’s setup. After finishing her
collegiate career in 2015 with two NCAA titles to her name,
Sisson could have joined any high-profile training group she
wanted. Instead, she stayed in Providence, Rhode Island, to
continue being coached by Providence College coach Ray
Treacy. While Providence was an elite magnet in the 1980s,
most pros now seek less-urban locales. But Sisson knew that
the chance to keep working with Treacy and train with
Olympians Molly Huddle and Kim Smith trumped a new training
system in a new setting. Her payoffs have included making two
Olympic teams and setting U.S. records in the half marathon
and marathon.
--- PAGE 201 ---
About that training: Treacy’s system is grounded in multipace
training. Sisson regularly touches on a wide range of
intensities: 5K race pace and faster, tempo runs at around half
marathon effort, and long runs that incorporate several miles at
marathon race pace or faster. Again, nothing fancy. Perhaps
even simple. But as jazz legend Thelonious Monk put it, simple
ain’t easy. Committing to proven principles and consistently
doing that unflashy work almost always serves runners better
than frequently switching from one training trend to the next.
Not that Sisson is uninterested in innovation. She’s up to date
on best practices such as rehydrating and refueling soon after
tiring runs to speed recovery. And with the help of her husband,
Shane Quinn, who is a therapist, she’s a leading proponent of
using sport psychology to help her mind get the most out of her
body. Quinn often paces Sisson via bike on hard workouts. If
she worries that she’s not hitting the time goals of the session,
Quinn helps her to reframe her performance by reminding her
of the workout’s purpose in the big picture—a few seconds here
and there don’t matter much. This reminder helps her relax; in
turn, she often winds up running the prescribed pace.
Quinn also helps Sisson prepare mentally for races. In lieu of
extensive visualization, however, they’ve learned that for
Sisson, simpler is better. Her version of chunking—breaking the
marathon distance into manageable segments—takes the form
of setting goals for a few mile marks en route. For example,
“Aim to get to 10 miles no faster than [amount of time] while
feeling relaxed.” Sisson then spends the stretch leading up to
that signpost meeting the goal as efficiently as possible.
Sisson’s strong mental game had an unusual aspect when
she set the American record—she finished the race not
knowing her time or place. Sisson ran behind two male pacers
who were told to run 5:18 per mile, with slight adjustments for
wind direction. That pace would have resulted in breaking the
previous record by about 15 seconds. Coach Treacy told
Sisson to lock in behind the pacers and to speed up only in the
final 5K. She followed the instructions to perfection, never
--- PAGE 202 ---
looking at her watch, running her fastest 5K between 35K and
40K, and breaking the previous mark by 43 seconds. This is a
valuable strategy to keep in mind if your marathon offers pace
groups for your goal finish time: Trust that the pace group
leader will set out at the proper speed. (Check a few milestones
in the first half to be sure.) Settle into that rhythm through at
least 18 or 20 miles (30 or 32 km). If you’re still feeling frisky
after that point, strike out on your own.
Sisson’s greatest strength is perhaps her self-knowledge.
She started her college career at the University of Wisconsin
but transferred to Providence after her freshman year—she
recognized Wisconsin wasn’t a good fit for her. She set her
U.S. marathon record in a low-profile shoe more akin to the
racing flats of decades ago than this decade’s ubiquitous super
shoes. That footwear choice came after trying her sponsor’s
offerings and deciding that the shoes she felt most comfortable
in were the right ones for racing.
Sisson has gravitated toward flat, fast marathons—she
debuted in London and set her U.S. record in Chicago—in part
because those are the courses where she knows she can be
most competitive. Alternatively, you might discover that you do
best on more undulating courses. We know runners who have
fared better on courses like Boston or New York City than
Chicago or Berlin. The important thing is to learn what works for
you and not change things just for the sake of novelty. If this
approach is good enough for an Olympian and U.S. record-
holder, it’s probably good enough for the rest of us.
Three weeks before your marathon is arguably the most important time
for a successful taper. This is the week that many marathoners do too much,
because race day still seems a long way off. If you work too hard during
this week, you may find yourself feeling flat with two weeks to go and
struggling to rest up as quickly as possible for the race. It’s much better
physiologically and psychologically to allow your body to start to freshen
up during this week. This will put you in a more relaxed state of mind,
--- PAGE 203 ---
feeling that your marathon preparation is on track rather than stressing that
all of your efforts are going to be wasted.
Marathoners tend to progressively decrease their training efforts during
their marathon taper. This method presents two problems. First, by steadily
decreasing training effort over three weeks, they risk a small loss in fitness
(adaptations to training are lost at about the same rate that they are gained)
before the marathon.
Another problem is psychological. The steady-reduction approach
doesn’t provide any psychological reinforcement. Marathoners generally
need reminders that they’re still fit or their confidence may become shaky.
The more effective approach to tapering is to intersperse harder efforts
within an overall trend of recovery. Figure 6.1 shows a three-week
marathon taper in which harder efforts are included every few days. This
type of taper will leave you fit, rested, and confident for the marathon.
Figure 6.1 Marathon tapering with the right balance of hard efforts and recovery.
Description
Leading up to the marathon, it is paramount to believe in your training
program by adjusting your taper to fit your individual needs. Keep a record
of your taper leading up to each of your marathons and how you felt and
performed in those races. Over time, you’ll be able to identify patterns that
will allow you to fine-tune your taper and gain confidence that your taper
has given you the maximal edge in performance. You can then apply those
--- PAGE 204 ---
insights to customize the tapering portion of your training schedule. For
example, many runners prefer a day off quite soon before the marathon. If
you’ve found that works for you, we recommend taking that complete rest
day two or three days before the marathon. It’s almost always best to do a
light jog the day before the marathon—you’ll feel better on race day, you’ll
have a chance to get a last check on any tight muscles, and perhaps most
important, you’ll do something other than stare at the walls all day fretting
about your race.
Based on the optimal tapering criteria we’ve just discussed, table 6.1
presents a sample tapering schedule for a marathon. This tapering program
is taken from the 18-week training schedule in chapter 10. By following this
schedule, your mileage would have peaked at 70 per week (113 km), and
you would have run your last 20-miler (32 km) on Sunday before the start
of the taper. Let’s go through this schedule day by day to see the rationale
for each day’s training.
Table 6.1 Sample Three-Week Marathon
Taper
WEEKS TO MARATHON
3 2 Race week
Monday Rest or cross-trainRest Rest
Tuesday
Gen-aerobic + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 6 x 100 m hill
sprints + 12 x 100 m
strides
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with
8 × 100 m strides
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Wednesday
Gen-aerobic 9-10
miles (14-16 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Dress rehearsal
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 2 miles (3 km) at
marathon pace
Thursday
Recovery + speed 6-7
miles (10-11 km) with
6 x 100 m strides
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14 km) with
5 × 1 km at 5K race pace;
jog 50%-90% interval time
Recovery
3-4 miles (5-6 km)
Friday Recovery Recovery Recovery + speed
--- PAGE 205 ---
WEEKS TO MARATHON
3 2 Race week
4-5 miles (6-8 km)5-6 miles (8-10 km) 4-5 miles (6-8 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Saturday
8K-10K tune-up race
(total 10-12 miles [16-
19 km])
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km) with 8
× 100 m strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday
Long run
16-17 miles (26-27
km)
Medium-long run
12-13 miles (19-21 km)
Goal marathon
Weekly
volume
52-59 miles (84-95
km)
40-46 miles (64-74 km)21-27 miles (34-43
km)
(6 days before race)
The first week of the taper starts with two days to recover from the long
run on Sunday. The second day includes six hill sprints and twelve 100-
meter strides to improve your leg turnover. Wednesday’s workout is a 9- to
10-miler (14 to 16 km) to provide a mild endurance stimulus.
Thursday and Friday are recovery days, leaving you well-rested for
Saturday when you run your last tune-up race before the marathon. The 8K
to 10K tune-up race provides a boost to your racing fitness that will make
marathon pace feel relatively easy, yet it is short enough that recovery will
occur quickly. Sunday is a 16- to 17-miler (26 to 27 km) to again provide a
moderate endurance stimulus to help maintain the adaptations, such as
increased glycogen storage and blood volume, from your previous long
runs. As discussed in chapter 1, having raced on Saturday, your long run on
Sunday should be at a more relaxed pace than your usual long runs.
The second week of the taper starts with three recovery days, with
Tuesday including 8 repetitions of 100-meter strides to enhance your leg
turnover. Thursday calls for your last workout at close to V O2max pace.
This is done 10 days before the marathon to allow time for recovery and
supercompensation. Friday and Saturday are recovery days, with Saturday
again including 100-meter strides to enhance your leg turnover. The week
ends with a 12- to 13-miler (19 to 21 km) on Sunday, once again providing
--- PAGE 206 ---
the body with a reminder to maintain the adaptations built up over many
weeks of long runs.
Marathon week is all easy recovery with the exception of Wednesday, a
dress rehearsal for the marathon. Wear the shoes, socks, shorts, and so on
that you’ll wear in the marathon. This is your last chance to check that
everything is right for the race. After an easy 3 miles (5 km), run 2 miles (3
km) at marathon race pace, then 1 to 2 more miles easy. You should feel
reasonably fresh but will probably not yet feel fully rested. If you have any
tight muscles, there’s still time to get a massage, stretch, use a foam roller,
or see a physical therapist to get your legs ready for race day.
By tapering in this way, you’ll reach the marathon start line as prepared
as possible. All that remains is the little matter of covering 26.2 miles (42.2
km) as fast as you can. Pacing and nutrition strategies to help you run your
best during the marathon are the focus of the next chapter.
TAPERING YOUR OTHER TRAINING
When you start cutting back your mileage, it can be tempting to increase
whatever nonrunning training you do. For the most part, try to resist that
urge. The various forms of supplementary training we looked at in chapter 4
have the same general purpose as your running training—to get you to the
marathon start line in optimal fitness for racing 26.2 miles (42.2 km).
Approach your core, resistance, flexibility, and cross-training as you do
your running when the marathon nears. That is, realize that the main work
is done, and your goal now shifts to maintaining the gains you’ve made
while allowing your body to rest up for race day.
WHERE’S THE PASTA FEED?
In chapter 2, we discussed the importance of carbohydrate
loading for the marathon. It’s important that your muscles and
liver are optimally stocked with glycogen when you reach the
start of the race. Of similar importance is arriving at the starting
line well hydrated. See chapter 2 for in-depth information on
these topics.
--- PAGE 207 ---
Keep your resistance workouts to a minimum in the last 10 days before
your marathon, and eliminate them in the last few days. It’s OK to continue
gentle versions of core training and cross-training until a few days before
the race. Flexibility training is fine to do right up to race day, but don’t go
overboard. If you’re used to a few 10-minute stretching sessions per week,
don’t suddenly devote an hour per day to it in the week before your
marathon.
The same goes for form drills. If you’re used to doing them, it’s fine to
continue with a short sequence in the week before the marathon. As with
flexibility training, the drills will help you feel looser during your taper,
which, if nothing else, can provide peace of mind while you’re reducing
your running. Again, don’t suddenly add new exercises or increase the
amount of drills you do during your taper.
SEEING SUCCESS
As race day approaches, it’s normal to feel anxious. The
marathon can seem more like a concept than a reality when it’s
10 weeks away, but when it’s just a matter of days, it can
become an all-too-real presence in your thoughts. That’s
especially true when you’re tapering your training and might be a
little more on edge as a result. And if you’re like many
marathoners, you’re worried that all the improvements made
during training will quickly evaporate after just a few rest days.
To keep your mind at ease, practice visualization during your
taper. Many of the world’s top runners consider race-week
visualization a key part of their final preparation. Use some of the
time you would usually allot to running—10 to 20 minutes per
day is a good amount—for this practice.
Start by sitting or lying in a quiet, comfortable spot, then
mentally run through your race in two ways. First, anticipate
potential problems. The goal isn’t to get more worked up about
your race. Rather, it’s to lessen the chance that you’re derailed
by an unfortunate development during the marathon. Visualize
things like getting boxed in during the early miles, missing an aid
--- PAGE 208 ---
station, inexplicably falling off pace, or challenging weather, then
picture yourself dealing with the problem and continuing with
your race plan. Visualize each potential problem in terms of, “If X
happens, then I’ll respond by doing Y.”
Second, visualize yourself running well at various parts of the
course. (This is easier to do if you’re familiar with the course or
have watched a video of it.) See yourself running relaxed in the
early stages of the marathon and then running strong over the
final 10K. Think about where in previous marathons the desire to
slow or stop might have cropped up. Acknowledge that
possibility, and then visualize yourself committing to bearing
down at that point. Finally, if you have a time goal for your
marathon, picture yourself hitting key splits en route and then
crossing the finish with the clock showing your goal time.
PRESERVING ENERGY (AND SANITY)
BEFORE THE MARATHON
If at all possible during the last week before the marathon, reduce not just
your training but also the amount of stress in your life. Assuming the
cooperation of your family, friends, boss, and coworkers, try to do the
following:
Avoid having major deadlines at work or other energy-draining
undertakings.
Wash your hands frequently to lower your risk of catching a cold or
other virus.
Get plenty of sleep early in the week, especially if you usually have
difficulty sleeping well in the few days before a big race.
Let others do the driving.
Minimize the amount of time you spend at the prerace expo.
Save sightseeing for after the marathon.
Spend a few minutes each day in a quiet spot visualizing a successful
race.
--- PAGE 209 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 210 ---
Y
7
RACE-DAY STRATEGY
our overall preparation for the marathon occurs over several months.
During that time, you meticulously plan and diligently train so
you’re in peak condition for the race. To do your best, however, you
also need to have a plan for the marathon itself. That plan is the focus of
this chapter. How much should you warm up for the marathon, and what
should that warm-up consist of? How should you handle the first few miles,
--- PAGE 211 ---
the first half of the race, the long stretch up to 20 miles (32 km), and the
final 6 miles and 385 yards (10 km)? Let’s take a look at race-day strategies
that help you get everything out of your months of preparation so you cross
the finish line exhausted but satisfied.
WARMING UP
Warming up for any race is important. The purpose of a warm-up is to
prepare your body to run at race pace. This involves increasing your
metabolic rate, your body temperature, and the circulation of blood (and
thus oxygen) to your muscles. The warm-up activates your aerobic system
to work optimally from the start of the race.
There’s a downside, however, to warming up for the marathon. One of
the challenges in the marathon is to reach the finish line before becoming
glycogen depleted. In chapter 2, we emphasized the importance of
carbohydrate loading in the several days before the marathon, having a
carbohydrate-rich prerace meal the morning of, and taking in carbohydrate
during the marathon to ensure that you don’t run out of carbohydrate before
the finish. But during a warm-up, you burn a mixture of carbohydrate and
fat, thereby slightly reducing your glycogen stores. The key, then, is to find
the minimum amount of warm-up necessary to prepare your body to handle
race pace as soon as the starter’s gun is fired so you save as much of your
carbohydrate reserves as possible for the 26.2 miles (42.2 km) ahead.
The optimal warm-up for the marathon depends on the level of the
marathoner. If your main goal is to finish, no warm-up is necessary. You can
warm up during the first couple miles of the race. If you will attempt to run
the distance significantly faster than normal training pace, you should do a
warm-up.
A typical marathon warm-up consists of the same dynamic flexibility
exercises you do before normal training runs, followed by about a mile (1.6
km) or 10 minutes of jogging and some light static stretching soon before
the start. That sequence accomplishes the basic goal of a warm-up, but for
the marathon we suggest a variation: 2 runs of about 4 to 5 minutes each
with some gentle stretching in between. This warm-up works well for the
marathon because you get a sense of how your body is feeling during the
--- PAGE 212 ---
first short run. You can then focus the rest of your warm-up on any minor
adjustments so you feel as good as possible when you line up for the start.
You should start warming up about 30 to 40 minutes before the start of
the race. After some dynamic flexibility exercises, start your first warm-up
run slowly, and gradually increase your pace so you finish at about 1 minute
per mile (37 seconds per km) slower than marathon race pace. Next, do
some stretching for 5 to 10 minutes, including loosening up your shoulders
and neck. Follow that with another 4 to 5 minutes of running, this time
gradually picking up the pace until you reach marathon pace for the final 30
seconds or so. On a warm day, you may want to drink a few ounces before
heading to the starting area.
That’s it. Try to time your warm-up so you finish no more than 10
minutes before the race starts. If you warm up too long before the race,
you’ll lose some of the benefits of the warm-up yet will have still used up
some of your carbohydrate stores. The ability to time your warm-up like
this is an advantage of running a smaller marathon, as compared with a
megarace where you’re more likely to be herded to your starting position
long before the race begins.
Before the start of the Olympic marathon, the athletes do a bit of nervous
jogging around, but almost no one does more than 10 minutes of easy
running plus one or two accelerations up to race pace. This is enough of a
warm-up for these runners to handle 5-minutes-per-mile pace for the first
mile. A similar routine will get you to the starting line prepared to handle
your goal marathon race pace.
YOUR PACING STRATEGY
Assuming that you have a time goal for the marathon, how should you go
about trying to achieve that time? Some marathoners go out hard and then
try to hang on as well as possible in the second half. Others try to run an
even pace throughout. A few take it easy early on and then run the second
half faster. Let’s consider the physiology of the marathon and the
implications for your optimal pacing strategy.
In chapter 1, we saw that your marathon pace is very close to your
lactate-threshold (LT) pace, which is determined by your oxygen
--- PAGE 213 ---
consumption at your LT and your running economy. If you run faster than
your LT pace, lactate accumulates in your muscles and blood; do this for
more than a few minutes, and the hydrogen ions associated with the lactate
begin to deactivate the enzymes for energy production and make you slow
down. When you exceed your LT pace, you also use more glycogen, so your
limited glycogen stores are depleted more quickly than necessary.
These basics of marathon physiology indicate that the best strategy for
the marathon is relatively even pacing. If you run much faster than your
overall race pace for part of the race, you’ll use more glycogen than
necessary and will likely start to accumulate lactate. If you run much slower
than your overall race pace for part of the race, you’ll need to make up for
this lapse by running faster than the most efficient pace for another portion
of the race. The optimal pacing strategy, then, is to run nearly even splits,
taking into account the idiosyncrasies of the course you’ll be running.
Most runners shouldn’t try to run dead-even splits, however, because
during the marathon you’ll gradually fatigue your slow-twitch muscle fibers
and will start to recruit more of your fast-twitch A fibers to maintain your
pace. Unfortunately, these fast-twitch fibers tend to be less economical than
your slow-twitch fibers in their use of oxygen. Therefore, your running
economy will tend to decrease slightly during the race, meaning that your
LT pace will decrease slightly as well. The result is that your optimal pace
will be slightly reduced during the later stages of the marathon.
For example, if your goal is to run 2:39 for the marathon, even splits
would require you to run 1:19:30 for each half of the race. To run even
splits, you would have to increase your oxygen consumption and lactate
level as your fatigue level increases during the second half of the race. A
more efficient pacing strategy would be to go through halfway in 1:18 to
1:19 because doing so would allow you to slow by 2 to 3 percent during the
second half and still achieve your goal. If you ran negative splits for the
marathon (i.e., the second half faster than the first half), chances are that
you ran more slowly than optimally during the first half of the race and
could have had a faster finishing time.
Some runners have reported that they’re better able to hold even pace
throughout the marathon when racing in super shoes. (See the “What Shoes
Should You Wear?” sidebar.) It’s impossible to know for how many runners
in super shoes that’s true and why exactly it might happen. One obvious
--- PAGE 214 ---
explanation is that running in super shoes might lead to less of the muscle
damage that can contribute to late-race slowing. This idea is supported by
the common perception of not feeling as beat up during and after a long run
in super shoes compared to conventional trainers. It’s also possible that,
because of enabling quicker recovery, super shoes can lead to better
preparation and, therefore, less of a tendency to fade over the final miles of
a marathon. If you’ve run marathons in super shoes and found yourself
finishing faster than you’ve run marathons in conventional shoes, this might
be a sign that you could adopt a more aggressive even-splits strategy.
For world-class marathoners, whose genetics and training put them on a
higher plane, the optimal pacing strategy is likely a bit different. These
select few are so highly trained that they have a lower tendency to recruit
less economical muscle fibers as the race progresses. In addition, they can
pick up the pace over the last several miles and gradually accumulate
lactate to the finish. For the best marathoners in the world, therefore, the
most effective pacing strategy is to run the second half of the marathon at
the same pace as, or even slightly faster than, the first half.
Most of the recent world records have followed this model of faster
second halves. In setting the world best of 2:00:35 at the 2023 Chicago
Marathon, Kelvin Kiptum ran 60:48 for the first half and 59:47 for the
second half. Similarly, in her world record at the 2023 Berlin Marathon,
Tigst Assefa ran 2:11:53 by running the first half in 66:20 and the second
half in 65:33.
Perhaps you’ll find it reassuring that even the best runners in the world
pay for it when they start a marathon too quickly. At the 2024 Tokyo
Marathon, Eliud Kipchoge attempted to reclaim the title of world-record
holder from Kiptum. Following overeager pacers, Kipchoge ran 28:30 for
the first 10K and passed 15K in 42:52—fast enough to win most open 10K
and 15K road races. Kipchoge slowed slightly but reached halfway in
60:34, faster than Kiptum’s first half in his record run. Still, Kipchoge had
already lost contact with the trio who would eventually place first, second,
and third, and he faded significantly after that. His second half took 66:16,
resulting in a finishing time of 2:06:50. Runners who had started more
moderately overtook Kipchoge, and the two-time Olympic champion placed
tenth, his lowest placing in any of his marathons.
--- PAGE 215 ---
Less dramatically, when Ruth Chepngetich ran her barrier-breaking
2:09:56 at the 2024 Chicago Marathon, she covered the first half in 64:16
and the second half in 65:40. It might sound silly to say so, but it’s possible
she could have broken Assefa’s world record by even more with a slightly
more conservative first half.
Eliud Kipchoge
Fastest marathon: 2:01:09 (Berlin, 2022)
Marathon highlights: champion in the 2016 and 2021
Olympics; 5-time Berlin, 4-time London, 1-time Tokyo, and 1-
time Chicago winner; world record holder in 2018 and 2022;
fastest marathon runner under any condition (1:59:40 at the
2019 INEOS Challenge)
We’re among those who consider Eliud Kipchoge to be the
greatest marathoner in history. That’s a pretty easy call
concerning someone who has won two Olympic titles, twice set
the world record, went undefeated for seven years, set course
records at three World Marathon Majors and, for good
measure, became the first person to run under two hours for
26.2 miles (albeit in an exhibition race not eligible for record
purposes).
--- PAGE 216 ---
Description
So, what can those of us who aren’t considered the greatest
marathoner in history learn from Kipchoge?
Kipchoge obviously has supreme physical gifts—you don’t
dominate as a marathoner and win Olympic and world
championship medals on the track otherwise. One of his key
talents is the ability to hold up to world-class training. Kipchoge
hasn’t suffered an injury significant enough to keep him from a
marathon start line. Remaining healthy has allowed him to bring
fitness from previous training cycles to underlie his current
work.
Still, we suspect some of his competitors would match or
exceed some of Kipchoge’s physiological measurements in lab
tests. What has really separated Kipchoge from the pack is his
mindset. That’s an area all marathoners can look to for time
gains.
--- PAGE 217 ---
“If you don’t rule your mind, it can rule you,” Kipchoge has
said. “I tell my mind that I’m really able to do this thing. And I
will do it.”
Kipchoge isn’t delusional—he hasn’t targeted a 1:30
marathon. What he’s talking about is being open to the
possibility that, with the right physical preparation, great things
can happen on race day if his mind is in the right place. Such a
mindset is more sophisticated than thrashing yourself and
otherwise ignoring your body’s signals. It’s about learning how
to work through the inevitable tough patches—in training and
racing—so that you stay positive, relaxed, and efficient. There’s
a growing body of research showing that concentrating on
staying relaxed not only diverts your mind from unpleasant
topics but also slightly boosts your running economy at a given
pace.
Kipchoge practices prerace visualization; he forms concrete
images of winning and running great times as well as scenarios
in which he overcomes setbacks. He has an arsenal of
personally meaningful mantras he repeats to himself in racing
and training that motivate him to stay focused on his goals.
Another key to Kipchoge’s psychological approach is that he
loves the process of preparing for a marathon. This isn’t to say
that every run is an endorphin rush for him or that you should
be giddy every time you wake early to run 12 miles before
work. Kipchoge’s take is akin to that of Olympic medalist Deena
Kastor, who talks about making choices, not sacrifices. That is,
view what you do to further your running as contributions to
your big-picture goal of running the best marathon you’re
capable of. For Kipchoge, that includes spending time in
training camp away from his family. For you, that could be
putting a positive spin on matters such as what you eat and
how often you do strength training.
As he entered his late 30s, Kipchoge’s air of invincibility
started to ebb. He finished eighth at London in 2020, the lowest
placing of his career at the time. He rebounded—and then
some!—by successfully defending his Olympic title in 2021, and
--- PAGE 218 ---
in 2022, he set a course record at Tokyo and a world record at
Berlin. But then he finished sixth at Boston in 2023. He won
Berlin that fall then had a disastrous (for him) 2024, placing
tenth at Tokyo and dropping out of the Olympic marathon, the
only DNF of his career.
There are lessons we can learn from the later part of
Kipchoge’s career. Before Boston, Kipchoge said that he didn’t
prepare specifically for the famously undulating course. He
started at course-record pace but then lost contact with the lead
pack in the Newton hills when the real racing began.
Apparently, even the greatest marathoner in history can’t ignore
the principle of training and racing appropriately for the course.
Kipchoge’s overall struggles as he neared age 40 highlight
the need for long-time marathoners to be open to new
approaches. Throughout his marathon career, Kipchoge has
immediately put himself near the front of the lead pack and
dared others to try to keep up. Some days, that still works for
him. But it’s not uncommon for runners to experience more day-
to-day variability in how they feel as they age. Continuing to
use the same tactics (and, for that matter, training) that worked
a decade earlier can backfire. For someone like Kipchoge, that
might mean that trying to win the 2024 Tokyo race caused him
to overextend himself and place tenth, when on that day in that
field he might have been able to place, say, third with a more
measured strategy. Being more flexible in this regard should be
easier for those of us not trying to add to an already historic
marathoning CV.
Sifan Hassan
Fastest marathon: 2:13:24 (Chicago, 2023)
Marathon highlights: first in the 2024 Olympics, the 2023
Chicago Marathon, and the 2023 London Marathon
--- PAGE 219 ---
Olympic champions are, by definition, outliers. But Sifan
Hassan is an outlier even among those outliers.
Description
Hassan first became widely known beyond hardcore running
fans at the 2021 Olympics, where she won the 5,000- and
10,000-meter titles and took bronze at 1,500 meters. Even
more improbable, at the 2024 Olympics, she earned bronze at
5,000 and 10,000 meters, and then she outsprinted the world-
record holder to win the marathon—just 36 hours after racing
the 10,000 meters in spikes! We’re also unaware of any other
runner who, like Hassan at London in 2023, won their debut
marathon against a world-class field despite stopping twice to
stretch their quads and repeatedly losing contact with the lead
pack.
Nonetheless, some key lessons emerge from studying
Hassan’s career.
First, Hassan hasn’t yet fallen into a trap that has snared
other track racers who are immediate successes in the
marathon. Some such runners arguably succeed in their first
one or two marathons because of, not despite, their recent
history of lots of V O2max and basic speed workouts. Marathon
race pace feels quite comfortable in comparison. But some
--- PAGE 220 ---
then tell themselves, “I’m a marathoner now,” and pile on more
volume and long tempo runs at the expense of shorter, faster
sessions. There are many examples of elites making this shift
and never improving on their initial marathons.
Hassan, in contrast, trains and races at a wide variety of
paces and distances, even when preparing for a marathon.
Doing so keeps her fresh physically and mentally. While you
won’t find “run a track 10K in spikes 36 hours before your goal
marathon” in any of our training schedules, we do encourage
you to keep in touch with a wide range of intensities and to not
avoid shorter races. Hassan’s race goals are dictated in part by
the international competition schedule. Yours can be a little
more flexible, such as targeting a fall marathon after a spring
season devoted to racing no farther than 5K or 10K.
Second, Hassan sets seemingly audacious goals as
motivators. (If nothing else, her goals require that she do the
truly varied training discussed above.) “It was really amazing,”
Hassan said after winning London in her debut. “I never thought
I would finish a marathon.” This is an overstatement—Hassan
could have stepped out her door any day and run 26.2 miles.
She meant racing a marathon against the best of the world
after spending the bulk of her career racing 1,500 meters on
the track. Goals that are a little scary are good because they
motivate you to do the work to meet them. She expressed
similar concerns before her 2024 Olympic triple. “It’s my crazy
thing,” she said. “I just want to complete it. I’m very curious.
Could I podium? Could I even complete? Am I strong enough?”
Finally, Hassan acknowledges that she’s aiming high but
doesn’t let her goals incapacitate her. “I always think, ‘Why the
hell do I do this to myself?’” she said between the 2024
Olympic Opening Ceremony and her first race, the qualifying
round of the 5,000 meters. On the start line, she often appears
absolutely miserable, her face frozen in a look of, “How did I get
myself into this mess?” She seems to calm herself by
momentarily lowering her expectations. In her track races, she
almost always goes immediately to the back of the pack, as if to
--- PAGE 221 ---
convince herself she’s not really racing yet, that she can just
hang out for however many laps and then get down to
business. Before the marathon, it’s via the dubious claim that
she just wants to finish.
Most marathoners feel similarly overwhelmed by the enormity
of the task ahead if they dwell on it. If that’s you, find ways to
channel your thoughts elsewhere. Then, once your race starts,
do like Hassan, and let your instincts, experience, and
preparation take over.
ALTERING YOUR STRATEGY
MIDRACE
Although in most cases you should stay with your pacing plan, occasionally
the weather or the tactics of other runners merit slightly altering your
strategy. If you’re running into a headwind, there’s a substantial advantage
to running in a group and letting others block the wind. Though you may
need to do your share in leading the group, you’ll still save considerable
energy compared with running by yourself into the wind. On a windy day,
therefore, you may need to run moderately faster or slower than planned to
stay with a group.
Even on a calm day, the best strategy may be to deviate slightly from
your goal pace rather than running most of the way by yourself. In a big-
city marathon such as Boston, New York, or Chicago, being stuck by
yourself isn’t a problem. At almost any pace, you’ll be among a number of
runners, and you can work with them to reach your goal time. In a smaller
marathon, however, you have a reasonably high chance of running by
yourself for many miles. In that situation, you must make a judgment call as
to whether to go a few seconds per mile faster or slower than planned to
stay with a group. Although drafting behind other runners will give you a
small energy advantage, most of the benefit of staying with a group is
psychological. You don’t have to set the pace, and you can relax and go
along with the group.
--- PAGE 222 ---
Most runners find it quite difficult mentally to run by themselves for
long stretches of the marathon. So what’s the trade-off between having
company and having to compromise your strategy? A rule of thumb is to
deviate from your goal pace by no more than 8 to 10 seconds per mile (1.6
km) if you would otherwise be running by yourself during the first 20 miles
(32 km) of the race. (Of course, you won’t know until afterward whether
you would have had to run by yourself.) Running 8 to 10 seconds per mile
faster than planned may not sound like much, but this difference in effort
can put you over the edge after a couple of miles. The best way to judge
whether to pick it up to latch onto a group is by how you feel at the time. If
you feel as though you can handle it, go for it. If your breathing is
uncomfortable and you can sense that you’re working at a higher intensity
than you can maintain until the finish, relax and let the others go. You may
find that the group soon breaks up and that you’ll once again have others
with whom to run.
ADAPTING TO HEAT AND HUMIDITY
If you’ve been training in cool conditions and it will be warm or
hot for your marathon, it pays to prepare in advance. If you’ll be
running a marathon in high humidity when you live in a low-
humidity environment, it’s even more important to prepare
because the body adapts differently to hot and humid conditions
than to hot and dry conditions.
As discussed in chapter 2, the evaporation of sweat is a key
cooling mechanism for the body. With high humidity, the air
contains more moisture and therefore less sweat evaporates
from your skin. You sweat more (and lose more fluid), but it’s less
effective in maintaining your body temperature. The result is that
your core temperature rises more quickly and you eventually
need to slow.
Even if race day starts at a mild 55 degrees Fahrenheit (13
degrees Celsius) and only increases to 65 degrees Fahrenheit
(18 degrees Celsius), a change from low humidity in training to a
--- PAGE 223 ---
high humidity marathon often catches runners out and leads to a
disappointing performance.
You can get used to warm conditions or warm and humid
conditions by doing some of your training on a treadmill (without
a fan to reduce evaporative cooling) or wearing more clothes
than you normally would during training runs. Allowing yourself to
be warmer than usual (uncomfortably warm but not drained)
during training will provide a stimulus for your body to adapt to
warmer conditions. Wearing more clothes during running
simulates high humidity by trapping heat next to your skin and
increasing your sweat rate and your core temperature. For
example, you could wear a long sleeve top, tights, and a cap
when you would ordinarily run in a t-shirt and shorts. To get the
most adaptation, use these two strategies as consistently as
possible over the final two to three weeks before your marathon.
If you have to do your final long run or tempo run somewhat
slower than planned, that’s okay because you’ll be simulating,
and therefore adapting to, race-day conditions.
On a warm and humid day or a day that’s just plain hot for your
marathon, stopping at aid stations rather than running through
them and drinking more fluid than you would in cooler conditions
will help you get through the race, but you’ll likely also need to
adjust your time goal. How much to adjust your time goal
depends on how hot and humid the day will be and how
challenging your target time is. Also, some runners are simply
better heat runners than others, regardless of their acclimation.
In general, err on the side of what might feel overly conservative
for at least the first half. Rather than starting with a wait-and-see
attitude or assuming that you’ll be able to gut it out, it pays to
adjust your marathon goal in advance and start out at a realistic
pace for the conditions.
During the final 6 miles and 385 yards (10 km), you can afford to be
more independent. If no one else is running at the correct pace for you after
you’ve passed the 20-mile (32 km) mark, you need to muster the courage to
--- PAGE 224 ---
go it alone. Chances are that forging out will work well psychologically
because if you have prepared well and run a fairly even pace, you’ll be
passing other runners throughout the final miles. Nothing lifts the spirits
quite like passing another runner late in the marathon.
WHAT ABOUT ORGANIZED PACE
GROUPS?
Many big marathons offer pacers to help guide runners toward
specific times. Unlike the pacers elites use, these pacers go the
whole marathon distance. Should you use this service?
It depends.
First, of course, is the matter of whether your marathon
provides a pacer at or near your goal time. Pacers for sub-3:00
times are rare. Bigger races often provide pacers in 5-minute
increments (e.g., 3:10, 3:15, 3:20, etc.), while pacers at smaller
marathons might be available in 10- or 15-minute increments.
The more pace-group options there are, the more it’s worth
considering joining one.
It’s rare for pacers to not finish near their target times. Most
are capable of running a marathon significantly faster; their
pacing assignment is usually at an easy to moderate long-run
effort for them. It can be comforting to tell yourself that if you
stick with this person, you’re almost guaranteed to finish in the
targeted time.
One big consideration is the topography of your marathon
course. Pacers tend to aim for an even pace, regardless of a
course’s hills, turns, and weather. Sometimes those factors
warrant even effort rather than even pace in the first two-thirds of
a marathon. Following an even pace in these situations might not
result in your best possible time that day.
Another item to consider is how comfortable you are running in
a potentially large group. If you’ve done most of your marathon
training solo or with one or two others, it can be jarring to
--- PAGE 225 ---
suddenly be part of a tight pack of 30 people running the same
pace. There might be a lot of talking, especially in the early
miles. You might have a harder time getting a clear shot at fluids
at aid stations. Whether being part of a big group is appealing or
a turnoff is an individual matter.
Our general recommendation: If there’s a pace group available
near your goal time, consider starting with it. Doing so is a good
way to ensure you don’t run the early miles too quickly. If you find
the group distracting, drift away from it. And if you’re having a
great day, don’t be afraid to strike out ahead over the last 10K.
THE FIRST HALF
You’re finally at the starting line, warmed up, and ready for the task ahead.
It’s all too easy to get carried away and run the first mile (1.6 km) too fast.
A better approach is to run the first mile at or a bit slower than your goal
pace. Because you won’t have done much of a warm-up before the start,
your body won’t be prepared to go faster than race pace. Also, if you run
too fast at the beginning of the race, your body will burn off extra glycogen
and start to accumulate lactate that could negatively affect the rest of your
race.
Once the first mile is out of the way, the best strategy during the next
few miles is to settle into a good rhythm. Try to run fast but relaxed.
Establishing a relaxed running style early in the race will go a long way
toward helping you avoid tightening up so you can maintain your goal pace
to the finish. Go through a mental checklist periodically to make sure your
shoulders are relaxed, your body is upright, and so on to help you maintain
good running style throughout the race.
WHAT SHOES SHOULD YOU WEAR?
Marathoners used to have to choose between lightweight,
minimally cushioned racing flats and heavier, more cushioned
shoes on race day. The tradeoff was saving weight (racing flats)
versus having more cushioning and support over the final miles
--- PAGE 226 ---
as fatigue and muscular damage accumulated (trainers). Many
competitive marathoners opted for the middle ground of a
lightweight trainer. As with much else in running, super shoes
have upended this old quandary.
We’ll define super shoes as models made primarily for racing
half marathons and marathons with these features:
A large amount of next-generation, bouncy midsole foam
A carbon fiber plate or other stiffening agent in the midsole
to provide stability given the large amount of foam
underfoot
A rockered geometry that helps to move the foot toward
toe-off
A relatively light weight—usually around 8 ounces (227 g)
or less for men and 7 ounces (198 g) or less for women—to
improve running economy
Research has found a wide range of improvements in running
economy among runners in super shoes versus conventional
shoes at the same pace. Faster runners tend to see a bit more
improvement, presumably because they’re putting more force
into the ground and therefore get more of a response from super
shoes’ design features. But slower runners still tend to get a 1 or
2 percent boost (Joubert, Dominy, and Burns 2023).
It can be difficult to find the right super shoe for you. You can’t
know which combination of midsole softness, plate positioning,
and shoe geometry works best for your running mechanics
without running at race pace. (Super shoes are awkward to walk
and even jog in, so there’s little to learn from a brief try-on.) Also,
super shoes are the most expensive shoes on the market; most
runners can’t afford to truly test several models.
Some runners, including a few sponsored elites, simply don’t
like the feeling of running in super shoes. The large amount of
foam underfoot can be challenging for runners with poor ankle
mobility. Most shoe brands offer what they call a “training
companion” to their premier racing shoes. These shoes
--- PAGE 227 ---
incorporate super shoe elements, such as modern midsole foam
and rockered geometry, in a less aggressive, slightly heavier
shoe. And if you’ve been able to meet your marathoning goals in
conventional trainers and have tried but didn’t like super shoes,
or if you simply can’t justify spending hundreds of dollars on
shoes that are good for only 150-200 miles, there’s no shame in
continuing to wear what works for you.
Regardless of which shoes you choose for race day, be sure to
try them out on tempo runs, at least one of your longer
marathon-pace training runs, and the short dress-rehearsal run
during taper week.
In chapter 2 we discussed having a plan for your fluid and carbohydrate
intake during the marathon. Glitches will arise, but do your best to adhere to
your plan for taking gels and drinks. Take a carbohydrate drink at the initial
aid station. It’s important to drink right from the start rather than wait until
you think you need carbohydrate or fluid. If you wait until you feel tired
and lightheaded to take in carbohydrate, it will be too late. Taking in
carbohydrate and fluid early will help reduce dehydration and postpone or
prevent carbohydrate depletion, which means you will be able to maintain
your goal pace longer. As we discussed in chapter 2, a few seconds lost at
each aid station can translate into several minutes gained toward the end of
the marathon.
Mentally, the first half of the marathon is the time to cruise. Try to save
your mental and emotional energy for the second half of the race. All other
factors being equal, if there is a group of runners in the lead pack at
halfway, the winner will be the one who has cruised along at the back of the
pack saving energy for the demands of the second half of the race. The
same principle holds true for slower packs as well. Regardless of your
ultimate finishing place in the marathon, you should realize that the second
half is going to be harder than the first half; just try to get the first half out
of the way at the correct pace without using any more mental energy than
necessary.
--- PAGE 228 ---
CHANGING TIME ZONES
If you’re traveling across the country or internationally for your
marathon, you need to consider the change in time zones. You
can prepare your body for that change by adjusting your sleep
and eating patterns to the new time zone for a few days before
you travel.
It’s easier for your brain to adjust to traveling west and
extending your day than it is to travel east and shorten your day.
Prior to westward travel, get used to getting up and going to bed
somewhat later than usual. This can be difficult with a job and
other commitments, but you should be able to adjust by an hour
or two in this way. Upon arrival, if you’ve traveled west for up to
four time zones, you can simply have a nap early in the day and
go to sleep at a normal time in the new time zone.
If you’re traveling east for your marathon, such as for New
York City or Boston, you should allow a day to adjust for each
hour change in time zone. For example, when traveling from the
West Coast to the East Coast for a marathon on Sunday, plan to
arrive no later than Thursday. For a few days prior to eastward
travel, try getting up earlier and going to bed earlier than usual
and adjusting your meals accordingly. This can be difficult in
practice, but you should be able to adjust by an hour or so. Upon
arrival, you may struggle going to bed on the earlier East Coast
time, but after three nights you should have adapted to the new
time reasonably well. This is particularly important if your
marathon has an early morning start.
A few other tips:
Set your watch and phone to the new time zone while on
the plane to mentally adjust
Avoid caffeine late in the day
Limit alcohol consumption, which interferes with sleep,
when traveling and upon arrival
--- PAGE 229 ---
When you arrive, go outside in the daylight to help your
brain adjust to the new time zone
If you have a nap, keep it under 45 minutes and wake up by
early afternoon
ON TO 20 MILES (32 KM)
From the halfway mark to 20 miles (32 km) is the no man’s land of the
marathon. You’re already fairly tired and still have a long way to go. This is
where the mental discipline of training will help you maintain a strong
effort and a positive attitude. It’s easy to let your pace slip 5 seconds per
mile (1.6 km), and then 10 seconds per mile or more, during this stretch. By
using all the available feedback on your pace—whether in the form of mile
or kilometer splits—you’ll know exactly how you’re progressing, and you
should be able to concentrate and maintain your goal pace during these
miles.
Slowing during this portion of the marathon is often more a matter of not
concentrating than of not being able to physically maintain the pace.
Focusing on your splits gives you an immediate goal to concentrate on. If
you’re consulting your GPS watch, bear in mind that its mile or kilometer
marks might vary slightly from the race’s markers, owing to how road race
courses are measured and the usual variances in GPS accuracy. Use the
race’s markers as your main pace barometers because your official final
time will reflect the course measurement, not what your watch says.
If you do slow during one of these miles, don’t suddenly increase your
pace to get back on track. If you’re using your GPS’s current-pace data, aim
to get back to your goal pace. When the next mile split confirms you’re
back on pace, chip away at the few lost seconds over the next few miles. By
focusing on these incremental goals along the way, you’ll prevent a large
drift in your pace and should be able to stay very close to your goal.
It’s not unusual to have a few miles when you just don’t feel good. These
bad patches are a test of mental resolve. Often these stretches will last a
while and then mysteriously go away. For example, you might feel tight and
uncomfortable from miles 15 to 17 but then get back in the groove again
--- PAGE 230 ---
and feel good to the finish. The key is to have the confidence that you’ll
eventually overcome this bad patch.
WHEN NOT TO FINISH
Most of the time, you should finish the marathon even if you’re
not running as well as you had hoped. The marathon is a test of
endurance. If you casually drop out of a marathon once, it will be
all too easy to drop out again. Of course, in certain situations,
struggling to finish a marathon may compromise your health or
your future marathon success. Here are some scenarios where
dropping out is your best choice:
If you’re limping, your running mechanics are thrown off.
You’ll merely aggravate your injury by continuing.
If you have a specific pain, and that pain is increasing
progressively during the race, you’re doing yourself harm
and should stop.
If you’re lightheaded and unable to concentrate, you should
stop.
If you’re overcome by muscle cramps, a torn muscle, heat
exhaustion, or the like, stop.
Pete learned this lesson years ago during the San Francisco Marathon.
After working quite hard from miles 13 to 16, he had a stretch of about 3
miles when his breathing felt out of sync on a particularly windy stretch of
road, and he struggled to stay with the other two leaders. Pete kept telling
himself to relax and that the other guys might be hurting too. Fortunately,
he settled back into a comfortable rhythm by 19 miles, felt strong enough to
drop the other two runners by the 20-mile mark, and cruised home to
victory. If Pete had let himself think negatively during the bad patch and let
the other two runners get away, he wouldn’t have won that race.
--- PAGE 231 ---
DROPPING OUT
In my marathon career, I started 18 marathons and finished 16,
including 8 victories. Of the two dropouts, one was because of
injury and the other was because of stupidity. Both occurred in
1986.
The dropout because of stupidity was the Boston Marathon.
This was the first professional Boston Marathon, with lots of
media excitement and financial incentives. I ignored my usual
race plan of running even splits and got carried away early.
During the first 10 miles, 1983 Boston Marathon champion Greg
Meyer and I exchanged the lead several times. When Greg
would take the lead, I would try to take it back.
This was overly aggressive racing on my part for so early in
the marathon. Meanwhile, Rob de Castella, who won that day,
sat in behind us, probably smiling to himself at the lack of
patience of the two Americans. By 12 miles, my breathing wasn’t
in its usual rhythm, my legs were already pretty beat up, and my
intestines were becoming increasingly uncomfortable. During the
next mile, I fell off the lead bunch and started to tighten up.
Knowing that I had gone too hard too early, I stopped just past
the halfway mark and quietly cursed myself. It was a lesson well
learned and a mistake I never made again.
The only positive aspect of dropping out so early was that I
recovered fully in about a week. A few weeks later, I used my
fitness and frustration to set a personal best of 28:41 for 10,000
meters on the track, and in July I redeemed myself over 26.2
miles by winning the San Francisco Marathon in 2:13:29.
My other dropout was in the 1986 Twin Cities Marathon, which
was also the trial race for the next year’s world championships. I
went into the race with a tight hamstring from stretching too hard
after a track workout several weeks earlier. It felt OK early in the
race but gradually tightened up in the drizzly 40-degree
Fahrenheit (4 degrees Celsius) weather. At 20 miles, I was at the
back of the lead pack when my hamstring tightened completely. I
--- PAGE 232 ---
couldn’t run another step. After walking for about a mile, I
gratefully accepted a ride to the finish. That dropout was easier
mentally because the decision was out of my hands.
Having had a frustrating year in the marathon, I was
determined to get a decent race under my belt as quickly as
possible. My physical therapist said that the hamstring wasn’t too
badly damaged and that I should run easily for about 10 days.
With regular massage, it loosened up, and I decided to run the
New York City Marathon, which was 3 weeks after Twin Cities. I
ran conservatively and gradually moved from 30th place at
halfway to finish ninth in 2:14:09.
I used those lessons to finish third running even splits in the
1987 New York City Marathon in 2:11:54 and five months later
running a strong last 10 miles to move up from seventh to third in
the 1988 U.S. Olympic Trials Marathon.
—Pete Pfitzinger
Bad patches between halfway and 20 miles can also stem from
encroaching muscular fatigue. Do periodic body scans to see if you’re
starting to run less efficiently. Go from top to bottom, focusing on one
element of good form at a time. Is your head lined up over your shoulders?
Are you relaxed in the face and neck? Are your shoulders low and even?
Are your hands loosely cupped? Is your trunk tall and not bent over at the
waist? Are your hips relaxed? Are your feet landing under rather than ahead
of your center of mass?
You can do these scans in just a few seconds. If an area feels tight or out
of alignment, envision how it felt in the early, relatively easy miles, and try
to regain that form. Fixing these small form deviations will make the
current stretch feel a little easier and will lessen the chance of an even
bigger form breakdown late in the race.
You don’t need to constantly monitor your form. A quick check every
mile or so is plenty. Keep doing these body scans the rest of the race, both
to maintain your technique and to provide a different psychological focus.
Taking in carbohydrate as often as possible during the second half of the
race can help you maintain your mental focus. The only fuel for your brain
--- PAGE 233 ---
is glucose (carbohydrate), and when you become carbohydrate depleted, the
amount of glucose reaching the brain starts to decrease. If you’ve
carbohydrate-loaded, this shouldn’t start to affect you until well past the 20-
mile (32 km) mark. As discussed in chapter 2, taking in carbohydrate (in
fluids and gels) during the race and particularly during the second half will
help ensure that you stay alert and think clearly throughout the race.
THE FINAL 6 MILES AND 385 YARDS
(10 KM)
Having made it to 20 miles (32 km), you’re at the most rewarding stage of
the marathon. This is the part that you have prepared for during your long
months of training. This is when your long runs, during which you worked
hard over the last stages, will really pay off. Until now, everything required
the patience to hold back. Now, you’re free to see what you’ve got. During
these final 6 miles and 385 yards (10 km), you get to dig deep and use up
any energy that you have left. This is what the marathon is all about. This is
the stretch that poorly prepared marathoners fear and well-prepared
marathoners relish.
The key from 20 miles (32 km) to the finish is to push as hard as you can
without having disaster strike in the form of a cramp or very tight muscles.
You will have prepared yourself for this during your long runs, your
marathon-pace runs, and, to a lesser extent, your tempo runs. You need to
use your body’s feedback to determine just how hard you can push.
Chances are that by now, your calf muscles, hamstrings, quads, or some
combination of these are on edge and will limit how fast you can go. You
need to test the waters a bit and push to what you perceive to be the limit
that your muscles will tolerate. This is a progressive meting-out process in
which you can take progressively greater risks as the finish line nears.
Although doing the how-many-miles-to-go math can be daunting early
on in the marathon, in this final stage it can help keep you focused. As the
finish approaches, telling yourself, “Less than 3 miles to go,” or “Just 15
minutes more,” can be motivating. If you’re struggling a bit toward the end,
picture yourself finishing a run on your favorite training loop so the
remaining distance seems more manageable.
--- PAGE 234 ---
If you’ve been taking in fluid and carbohydrate throughout the race, your
muscles should be in pretty good condition. Keep drinking until 25 miles
(40 km). Keeping up your blood sugar level will keep you alert so you can
concentrate well to the end. If your stomach is bothering you in the final
miles, use the rinse-and-spit drink technique discussed in chapter 2.
When you see the finish line approaching, give a little more effort so you
run strongly over the line. Show yourself that you have mastered the
marathon and are able to kick it in a bit to the finish. Then enjoy the fruits
of your labor.
In these first several chapters, we’ve looked at preparing for and running
the marathon from all the necessary angles. Now it is time to put theory into
practice. The rest of this book contains training schedules that implement
the physiological principles of marathoning. The knowledge gained from
this first section of the book combined with the marathon-specific fitness
that following the schedules will bring you should leave you well prepared
for marathon success.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 235 ---
PART II
Training Programs
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 236 ---
A
8
FOLLOWING THE SCHEDULES
s we noted in the preface, many readers want to get right to the
training schedule of their choice and start working. That’s fine, but
before getting too far into your training, you’ll want to read this
chapter. In it, you’ll learn the best way to do each of the run types called for
in the schedules. You’ll also see how to tailor the mileage in the schedules
--- PAGE 237 ---
to your capacity and what to do when the almost inevitable roadblocks pop
up during your training.
The training schedules in chapters 9 through 13 include a specific
workout for each day as well as a category of training for that day. Many of
the workouts provide a range of distance so that you can tailor the session
based on how you’re feeling that day. For example, a recovery run may
specify a range of 5 to 7 miles, a general aerobic run may call for 8 to 10
miles, and a medium-long run may be 12 to 14 miles. By selecting the
distance that feels right for your energy level, you fulfill the training
purpose for the day while listening to your body.
The workouts are divided into eight categories: long runs, medium-long
runs, marathon-pace runs, lactate-threshold (LT) runs, general aerobic runs,
recovery runs, V O2max intervals, and speed training. Each run is explained
here, including how to get the most benefit from a given workout. For an
in-depth explanation of the physiological benefit and role of each type of
training, see chapter 1.
LONG RUNS
In the training schedules, a long run is any run of 16 miles (26 km) or
longer. The intention of long runs is (obviously) to improve your endurance
in preparation for the marathon’s 26.2 miles (42.2 km).
To gain the most from your long runs, do them in the correct intensity
range. Long runs shouldn’t be slow jogs during which you just accumulate
time on your feet. As discussed in chapter 1, the appropriate pace for a
specific long run depends on the purpose of that run within your training
program. The most beneficial intensity range for most of your long runs is
10 to 20 percent slower than your goal marathon race pace. For most
marathoners, long-run pace coincides with about 75 to 83 percent of
maximal heart rate or 66 to 77 percent of heart rate reserve. In terms of your
breathing, this effort should feel about the same or slightly harder than a
general aerobic (or average) run but considerably easier than marathon race
pace. In this intensity range you find the optimal balance between running
hard enough to simulate the muscle patterns and posture you’ll use at
--- PAGE 238 ---
marathon race pace and running moderately enough that you can recover
relatively quickly for your other important training sessions.
Start out at the slow end of the range. Gradually pick up the pace so you
run the last 5 to 10 miles (8-16 km) at about 10 percent slower than your
goal marathon race pace. Gradually picking up the pace during your long
runs and finishing strongly will also provide positive psychological
reinforcement that you’re in control of the marathon. To gain the greatest
benefit, design your long-run courses to simulate the hill profile of your
marathon. (See the section on hill running later in this chapter.) If your
long-run course is much hillier than your marathon, your pace will be
somewhat slower.
The schedules also include marathon-specific long runs at goal marathon
race pace (discussed later in the chapter) and slower long runs the day after
a tune-up race. On the day after a race or hard workout, your long run
should be at a relaxed pace because you’re likely to be tired and stiff, which
will increase your likelihood of injury. Start these long runs like a recovery
run. If your muscles loosen up as the run progresses, increase the training
stimulus by increasing your pace to about 15 to 20 percent slower than
marathon race pace.
MEDIUM-LONG RUNS
A medium-long run is any run of 11 to 15 miles (18-24 km). Medium-long
runs reinforce the physiological benefits of your long runs. When your legs
are reasonably fresh, such as the day after a general aerobic run or recovery
run, the pace for these runs should be similar to the pace for long runs. If
you do a hard training session the day before a medium-long run, do the
medium-long run toward the slower end of the intensity range.
Avoid the temptation to do your medium-long runs too hard because this
will prolong your recovery time and reduce the quality of your other key
workouts. As with long runs, design your courses for medium-long runs to
simulate your marathon.
--- PAGE 239 ---
MARATHON-PACE RUNS
Marathon-pace runs are medium-long or long runs during which you run
most of the miles at your goal marathon pace. These runs provide the
precise physiological benefit of allowing you to practice the pace and form
of race day. They’re also a great confidence booster.
Start these runs comfortably, as you would other medium-long or long
runs, and then run the last portion at marathon race pace. For example, if
the schedule calls for 16 miles (26 km) with 12 miles (19 km) at marathon
race pace, gradually pick up the pace during the first 4 miles (6 km), and
then run the last 12 miles (19 km) at marathon goal pace. The objective of
these runs is to prepare your body as specifically as possible for your
upcoming marathon, so design your course to simulate your marathon as
closely as possible. For most well-trained marathoners, marathon pace
coincides with about 81 to 88 percent of maximal heart rate or 74 to 84
percent of heart rate reserve.
Matt Glynn
Fastest marathon: 2:30:43 (Twin Cities, 2004)
The most gratifying aspect of Advanced Marathoning’s success
is hearing from satisfied readers. That’s especially the case
when the readers are already dedicated, knowledgeable
runners who improved after following one of our schedules.
--- PAGE 240 ---
Description
Matt Glynn, of Buffalo, New York, is one such reader. A
member of his high school cross country team, Glynn ran on his
own in college and discovered how much he loves long-
distance running. He ran his first marathon at age 19, finishing
just under 3:30. He plugged away, aiming to break 3:00, which
he did in 1998 when he was in his late 20s. From there Glynn
continued to progress, all the way down to sub-2:40.
But Glynn knew he had more potential. “I was trying to break
2:30,” he says, “and needed a guide to get me there.” In 2002,
he started following the 12-week, 70-plus-miles-per week
schedule from the first edition of Advanced Marathoning. “I
made breakthroughs with these workouts,” Glynn says. “I’ve
now run 40 marathons, and my top nine times, all sub-2:40,
have come since I’ve used Advanced Marathoning plans.” That
includes his best of 2:30:43, set at Twin Cities in 2004, when
Glynn was in his mid-30s. Now in his mid-50s, Glynn still
--- PAGE 241 ---
follows a plan for his usual schedule of a spring and fall
marathon, topping out at 55 miles a week as a way to balance
proper preparation with the recognition that 80-mile weeks will
likely do him more harm than good.
“I appreciate the blend of speed workouts, medium-long runs,
and recovery runs, and how all of the science and logic behind
everything is spelled out in the book,” Glynn says. The biggest
changes to what he was doing on his own were the medium-
long runs and long runs with segments at marathon race pace.
“Those workouts were not easy, but I found the rest of the
week’s workouts balanced enough that I came into those
workouts still ready to go,” he says. “It took some adjusting, but
I understood the logic behind the workouts spelled out in the
book and stuck with it.”
On a practical level, his biggest adjustment was to the
midweek medium-long run. We’ve heard the same from many
readers. Most wind up doing like Glynn—namely, finding a way
to make it happen. That often means getting up however early
and having faith the extra work will pay off. “I’ve always strived
to carve out meaningful time for workouts at times when it won’t
take away from family time and work time, like early in the
morning,” Glynn, a reporter for the Buffalo News and father of
two boys, says. (Now that his sons are of college age, family
time is running time—they join Glynn for some workouts and
races.)
Elsewhere in this chapter we discuss readers’ tweaks to the
training schedules. Glynn has been more of a follow-it-as-best-
as-possible marathoner, except when hurt or sick. “I like
knowing I’m arriving at the starting line as prepared as I could
be, from following the plan meticulously,” he says. “I know each
workout has value in the bigger picture of fitness and
preparation. I trust in the training plan, and want to get
everything I can from it.”
Two decades past his personal best, Glynn has found other
ways to set meaningful time goals. “I try to base my goal times
off other races I run during the year and how things are going
--- PAGE 242 ---
with tune-up races before a marathon,” he says. “I find those
times give you a realistic picture of what you’re capable of.”
More subjectively, Glynn still aims to do his best in each
marathon. “Even if I’m not racing the pace I once did, the
distance—and often the course—pose enough of a challenge,”
he says. “There’s a satisfaction in knowing that I got the most
out of my training, even though my finish time goal isn’t
ambitious as it once was. I’ve struggled through enough
marathons to relish it on the days when a race goes right.
Those memories can carry you forward in future training runs
and future marathons.”
LACTATE-THRESHOLD RUNS
The lactate-threshold (LT) runs in the training schedules are tempo runs in
which you run for at least 20 minutes at your LT pace. The effort should be
the pace that you could race for about an hour. For most marathoners, this
pace range corresponds with about 83 to 90 percent of maximal heart rate or
77 to 87 percent of heart rate reserve. Another way to estimate LT pace for
experienced runners is about 10 to 15 seconds per mile slower than 10K
race pace. Tempo runs provide a strong stimulus to improve your LT pace,
which leads to similar improvements in your marathon race pace. The LT
sessions are done after a 2- to 3-mile (3-5 km) warm-up and should be
followed by about a 15-minute cool-down. The tempo runs in the schedules
range from 20 to 25 minutes up to 30 to 40 minutes for the 12-week
schedules and 35 to 45 minutes for the 18-week schedules. As an example,
if the schedule calls for 10 miles (16 km) for the day and 30 to 35 minutes
at LT pace, warm up for 3 miles (5 km), do the tempo run, then cool down
for 2 miles (3 km) or so to reach a total of 10 miles.
Slower runners obviously cover less distance in the same amount of
time, but because LT pace is the pace you could race for an hour, basing
these sessions on time is appropriate for faster and slower marathoners. In
previous editions of Advanced Marathoning, we prescribed the distance for
tempo runs and have responded to feedback from slower marathoners that,
--- PAGE 243 ---
for example, a 6-mile tempo run would take 50 minutes and it was a
struggle to maintain that effort for that long.
As mentioned in chapter 1, lactate threshold workouts can be done as
one continuous tempo run or as a long interval session at your LT pace
(termed LT intervals or cruise intervals). Table 8.1 provides examples of LT
interval workouts that are roughly equivalent alternatives to the tempo runs
in the training schedules. The recovery jog is intended to be brief enough
that you gain the full accumulated benefit of the two or three LT intervals in
each workout but long enough that you get an appropriate mental break
before the next effort. The jog between efforts starts gently, similar to the
jog between V O2max intervals, but as you feel ready, gradually pick up the
pace to standard recovery run effort.
Table 8.1 LT Interval Workout Alternatives
for Tempo Runs
Tempo run
duration LT interval workouts
20-25 min 3 × 8 min @ LT pace (3-min jog between)
12 min @ LT pace, jog 4 min, 10 min @ LT pace
10 min @ LT pace, jog 3 min, 8 min @ LT pace, jog 3 min, 6 min @
LT pace
25-30 min 3 × 9 min @ LT pace (3-min jog between)
15 min @ LT pace, jog 4 min, 12 min @ LT pace
12 min @ LT pace, jog 4 min, 10 min @ LT pace, jog 4 min, 8 min @
LT pace
30-35 min 3 × 11 min @ LT pace (3-min jog between)
18 min @ LT pace, jog 4 min, 14 min @ LT pace
14 min @ LT pace, jog 4 min, 11 min @ LT pace, jog 4 min, 8 min @
LT pace
35-40 min 3 × 12 min @ LT pace (4-min jog between)
20 min @ LT pace, jog 5 min, 16 min @ LT pace
16 min @ LT pace, jog 4 min, 12 min @ LT pace, jog 4 min, 8 min @
LT pace
40-45 min 3 × 14 min (4-min jog between)
22 min @ LT pace, jog 5 min, 20 min @ LT pace
18 min @ LT pace, jog 4 min, 14 min @ LT pace, jog 5 min, 10 min
@ LT pace
--- PAGE 244 ---
GENERAL AEROBIC RUNS
General aerobic runs include your standard, moderate-effort runs of up to
10 miles (16 km). They’re slower than LT runs, shorter than medium-long
runs, and faster than recovery runs. The intention of general aerobic runs is
to enhance your overall aerobic conditioning through boosting your training
volume; these runs improve your marathon readiness because many of the
beneficial adaptations that improve endurance are related to the total
volume of your training.
For most runners, the optimal intensity range for these runs is about 15
to 25 percent slower than marathon race pace. Usually, this pace range
coincides with about 72 to 80 percent of maximal heart rate or 62 to 73
percent of heart rate reserve. Because the primary purpose of these runs is
to increase your training volume, if you’re too tired to do a hard training
session the next day, that means you’re doing your general aerobic runs too
hard.
RECOVERY RUNS
Recovery runs are relatively short runs done at a relaxed pace to enhance
recovery for your next hard workout. These runs aren’t necessarily jogs, but
they should be noticeably slower than your other workouts of the week. The
optimal intensity for recovery runs for most marathoners is to stay below
about 75 percent of maximal heart rate or 66 percent of heart rate reserve.
On a subjective basis, on recovery runs you should feel as if you’re storing
up energy rather than slowly leaking it. You should finish the run refreshed.
Going too hard on recovery days—when your body is most tired—means
you’ll be more tired than you should when it counts later in the week.
Try to find flat courses for your recovery runs, but if your recovery runs
include some hills, you’ll need to extend the range by a few beats per
minute on the uphills or run exceedingly slowly. Whenever possible, do
your recovery runs on soft surfaces to help speed recovery that much more.
Some marathoners opt for aerobic cross-training over running on their
recovery days. This can be a good choice if you’ve often gotten injured
during previous marathon buildups, are trying to finesse your way through a
--- PAGE 245 ---
minor ailment, or are unusually sore or tired the day after your long run.
Cross-train for the amount of time the prescribed recovery run would take
you and at the same intensity as for a recovery run. You’ll most likely to be
able to sustain the proper intensity with a form of cross-training you’re
familiar with. Aerobic cross-training options are discussed in chapter 4.
V O2MAX INTERVALS
The V O2max intervals in the schedules range from 600 meters to 1,600
meters and are run at current 5K race pace. Though V O2max work is an
important part of your marathon preparation, it’s not as crucial in the
marathon as it is in races such as the 5K and 10K. The V O2max sessions in
these schedules, then, strike a balance between being long enough to
provide a powerful training stimulus and short enough so you can recover
quickly for your other important workouts of the week.
The same reasoning applies for the prescribed pace in these V O2max
workouts. Whereas runners focusing on shorter races need to do some of
their intervals closer to 3K race pace, marathoners gain maximum benefit
from sticking to 5K race pace. By sticking to the lower to middle end of the
effective intensity range (i.e., about 93-95 percent of maximal heart rate or
91-94 percent of heart rate reserve), you’ll provide a strong stimulus to
improve your V O2max while recovering quickly for your other important
workouts. For that reason, the training intensities for V O2max workouts in
table 8.2 on page 171 call for only the more conservative 5K pace ranges.
The optimal amount of rest between intervals is debatable. One school of
thought is to minimize rest so your metabolic rate stays high during the
entire workout. This strategy makes for very difficult workouts (which can
be good), but you risk shortening your workouts. Another school of thought
is to allow your heart rate to decrease to a predetermined level (such as 70
percent of your maximal heart rate or 65 percent of your heart rate reserve)
during your recovery between intervals, which provides close to the optimal
balance of effort and recovery.
For the lower-tech crowd, a useful rule of thumb is to allow 50 to 90
percent of the length of time it takes to do the interval for your recovery.
For example, if you’re running 1,000-meter repeats in 3:20, you would run
--- PAGE 246 ---
slowly for 1:40 to 3:00 between intervals. We use this method of measuring
recovery in the schedules.
SPEED TRAINING
Speed runs are repetitions of 50 to 200 meters that improve leg speed and
running form. These workouts train your nervous system to allow you to
maintain a faster rate of leg turnover during your races. For marathon
training, strides of 100 meters are long enough to provide the desired
benefits.
These sessions are done after a thorough warm-up and often toward the
end of a general aerobic run or a recovery run. Allow yourself plenty of rest
between repetitions so you can run each one with good technique.
A typical session of strides is 10 repetitions of 100 meters in which you
accelerate up to full speed over the first 70 meters and then float for the last
30 meters. It’s critical to remain relaxed during these accelerations. Avoid
clenching your fists, lifting your shoulders, tightening your neck muscles,
and so on. Concentrate on running with good form, and focus on one aspect
of good form, such as relaxed arms or complete hip extension, during each
acceleration.
A typical rest is to jog and walk 100 to 200 meters between repetitions.
The most important considerations are to maintain good running form and
to concentrate on accelerating powerfully during each repetition.
As discussed in chapter 1, another way to improve your speed is by
running short hills of 10 to 12 seconds up a moderately steep hill, then
walking or jogging back to the start. These short efforts build muscle
strength and power and improve your running economy. A very effective
workout consists of combining short hill sprints with 100-meter strides on
the flat. A typical workout consists of a 15-minute warm-up, followed by 6
to 8 uphill sprints of 10 to 12 seconds, and then 8 strides of 100 meters,
finishing with a cool-down jog.
The prescribed training intensities used in this chapter and in chapters 1
and 3 are summarized in table 8.2. These intensity ranges are appropriate
for most experienced marathon runners. Less experienced runners should
generally train at the lower end of the recommended ranges, while elite
--- PAGE 247 ---
runners will generally train at the high end of the ranges. (Heart rate isn’t
relevant during the short speed sessions, so we’ve left them out of this
table.)
Table 8.2 Heart Rate Intensities for
Marathon Training Workouts
Maximal heart rate (%) Heart rate reserve (%)
Long/medium-long 75-83 66-77
Marathon pace 81-88 74-84
Lactate threshold 83-90 77-87
General aerobic 72-80 62-73
Recovery <75 <66
V O2max (5K pace) 93-95 91-94
DOING DOUBLES
Marathoners have a tendency to start running twice a day before their
weekly mileage warrants it. Doing doubles sounds like serious training, so
runners often assume it must be better marathon preparation. The reality is
quite different; as you increase your training mileage in preparation for a
marathon, you should resist the urge to switch from single runs to doubles.
In chapter 1, we discussed the various training adaptations that are
specific to improving your marathon performance. Marathon training
focuses on endurance-based adaptations such as depleting your glycogen
reserves to provide a stimulus for your body to store more glycogen and
training your muscles to utilize more fat at a given speed. You’ll provide a
greater stimulus for these adaptations through a single 12-mile (19 km) run
than by doing a 7-miler (11 km) and a 5-miler (8 km) at the same pace.
It might sound counterintuitive, but runners preparing for shorter races
should run more doubles at a given level of weekly mileage than
marathoners. Runners focusing on 5Ks, for example, should start adding
doubles when their weekly mileage gets above 50 (81 km). That’s because
--- PAGE 248 ---
the 5K specialists’ main training emphasis is high-quality interval sessions,
and more frequent, shorter runs will help keep their legs fresh for these
workouts.
For marathoners, the basic guideline is to not do double workouts until
you’ve maximized the amount you’re running in single workouts. If you’re
preparing for a marathon and are running fewer than 75 miles (121 km) a
week, you shouldn’t regularly run doubles. If you’re running fewer than 75
miles a week, by the time you get in your long run and a midweek medium-
long run, there’s no reason to double more than once or twice a week to get
in the remaining miles. It’s better to get in longer runs and give your body
22 or 23 hours of recovery between runs.
Once you get above 75 miles (121 km) a week, however, double
workouts have a definite role in your marathon program. As with any other
aspect of training, doubles should be introduced gradually. Start by adding
one double per week and then another as you gradually increase your
mileage. The schedules in chapters 9 through 13 reflect this approach to
adding doubles, with double days called for only in the higher-mileage
programs.
How, then, should you introduce doubles into your program? The
training schedules in this book add second runs to a day’s training for
specific reasons. One main category of second runs is on hard days. An easy
run in the morning will loosen you up for an evening V O2max session or
tempo run. Similarly, 30 minutes of easy running in the evening will help
you recover from a morning tempo run.
A second main use of doubles in the schedules is on recovery days.
When your mileage increases to where your recovery days call for more
than 8 miles (13 km) of running, it’s time to switch those days to easy
doubles. It’s easier on your body and your recovery will be enhanced if you
do two runs of 5 miles (8 km) rather than a single 10-miler (16 km). Avoid
the temptation to add mileage to your recovery days for the sole purpose of
boosting your weekly mileage. Extra mileage on these days is
counterproductive because your recovery will be less complete for your
subsequent hard days.
The schedules may also call for an easy second run on the day of your
medium-long run. These runs will provide an incremental training stimulus
--- PAGE 249 ---
by depleting your carbohydrate stores and training your muscles to rely
more on fat at a given speed. It’s preferable to do the second, short run in
the evening after a medium-long run in the morning. If your schedule is
such that you’ll be doing your medium-long run in the evening, be sure to
run very easily in the morning. As we discussed earlier in this chapter and
in chapter 1, medium-long runs bring you the most benefit if they’re done at
10 to 20 percent slower per mile than marathon race pace, so don’t let a
short morning run detract from the medium-long run’s quality. A better-
quality medium-long run is preferable to a double in which the medium-
long run is a slog.
WHEN DOUBLES AREN’T WORTH IT
The minimum time for an added second run should be 25
minutes. If you run less than that, it’s hardly worth the extra time
and effort—both physiologically and in taking time from your
busy life—to change, get yourself out the door, stretch, shower,
and so on. That’s especially the case if a too-short, not-crucial
run means cutting into precious sleep time. In some situations,
it’s wiser to add cross-training to your program than to increase
your risk of injury with more miles of running. Various options for
cross-training are discussed in chapter 4.
The schedules never call for a second run on the day of your weekly long
run. That would be a perfect example of mileage for mileage’s sake because
an evening run after your long run will only slow your recovery. As soon as
you finish your long run, your objective switches to recovering as quickly
as possible for your upcoming hard training days.
A WORD ABOUT HARD DAYS
Looking at these schedules, you might be wondering, “Where are all the
speed workouts?” After all, it’s normal to think that anyone preparing for a
marathon should be training as hard as possible, and what better way to be
--- PAGE 250 ---
sure you’re doing so than by hitting the track at least once a week for lung-
searing intervals, right?
In chapter 1, we explained at length the principles underlying these
schedules. Briefly put, we designed the schedules to provide the optimal
stimuli to the physiological systems that most determine marathoning
success—endurance, LT, and V O2max, in that order of importance. It’s your
long runs and tempo runs that have the most relevance to your performance
on marathon day, not how often you’ve churned out a sterling set of half-
mile repeats.
During your long buildup, understanding the components of marathon
success can provide confidence that you’re training properly. Use the
explanation of marathon physiology from chapter 1 not only to explain to
your training buddies why you won’t be joining them for 400-meter repeats
next week but also to remind yourself why you’re doing yet another 15-
miler (24 km) in the middle of the workweek. If your running friends
continue to chide you that you’re not training hard enough, invite them to
follow the schedules with you for a few weeks, then report back. We
suspect they’ll have gotten the message by then.
WHAT ABOUT HILL WORKOUTS?
In the training schedules, other than short hill sprints, we don’t prescribe
specific hill training sessions. That’s because how much to focus on hill
training depends on the topography of your marathon. For one of the
pancake-flat courses designed to yield fast times, such as London, Chicago,
or Berlin, you’ll need to be prepared to run for 26.2 miles (42.2 km) over
unvarying terrain. If, however, you’ll be racing on a hilly course, the more
closely you can simulate the terrain of the race in your training, both up and
down, the better. (The classic course for which race simulation is essential
is the Boston Marathon, which has sucked the lifeblood from many an
unprepared runner.) By planning training runs to include hills of roughly the
same length and steepness as your upcoming race, you’ll give yourself the
best chance for an optimal performance on race day.
Any of the workouts in the training schedules can be run on hills. By
training on hills and simulating your marathon course, you add variety to
--- PAGE 251 ---
your training and make your preparation more specific to increase your
likelihood of achieving your marathon goal.
Once or twice per week, your tempo runs, long runs, medium-long runs,
and general aerobic runs should mimic the hill profile of your upcoming
marathon. Simply adjust your pace to keep the effort at approximately the
correct intensity. (Allow your heart rate to increase by up to 10 beats per
minute on the uphills, but ease up after the hills to get back into the
appropriate range.) You can even do some of your V O2max sessions up and
down hills, although it’s easy to overextend yourself by going too hard early
in the workout. For uphill V O2max workouts, your recovery will be
somewhat longer than usual as you run back down the hill. That’s fine—the
benefit of the uphill training outweighs this minor adjustment.
If you live in the flatlands but are training for a hilly marathon, don’t
despair—with a bit of creativity you can gain the benefits of hill running.
Runners in Miami have been known to run the ramps of a parking garage
on Sunday mornings, and you can replicate almost any uphill workout on a
treadmill.
Correct uphill running technique is relatively simple. The most common
error in running uphill is leaning forward, which is counterproductive to
maintaining speed. Looking ahead and not down will help you retain a more
upright posture. Let your stride shorten and your knees lift naturally so that
you feel as efficient as possible. You will tend to use your arms more as you
lift your knees, but try to keep your shoulders and arms relaxed. On
downhills, try not to brake. Keep your center of gravity perpendicular to the
hill so gravity can help you run down it as quickly as possible.
WHAT TO DO WHEN YOUR TRAINING
GETS INTERRUPTED
Part of the challenge of the marathon is that preparing for it takes so long
and the training required is so demanding that roadblocks along the way to
your goal are nearly inevitable. It’s important not only to organize your
training and life so that as few impediments as possible crop up but also to
deal with the ones that nevertheless occur. The most common roadblocks
are injuries and illnesses, bad weather, and outside commitments. Let’s
--- PAGE 252 ---
consider each of these intrusions into your marathon preparation to see how
to adjust the schedules.
Injuries and Illnesses
Injuries and illnesses are best caught early. Successful marathoners have the
ability to recognize an injury or illness at an early stage before it becomes
serious. Returning to training after an injury or illness requires careful
analysis—too much too soon will result in additional time off. During this
period, it’s important to avoid the factors that caused the injury or illness in
the first place, such as worn-out shoes, running on concrete, overtraining, or
a lack of sleep. Be sure to read chapter 3 carefully to learn how to stay on
top of your recovery so your chances of getting hurt or sick are lessened.
If you’re forced to miss more than a few days of training, you need to
decide whether to try to catch up or revise your marathon goal. This
decision will be influenced by how much time you missed, how long
you’ve been preparing, and how many weeks are left until your marathon.
Missing 2.5 weeks of preparation when you have 16 weeks to go is no big
deal, but missing that amount of time during the last 2 months of
preparation will likely require you to modify your goal.
Table 8.3 provides guidelines for when you may need to revise your
goals after an injury or illness. Typically, if you’ve lost fewer than 10 days
of training, you can safely start back where you should have been on the
schedules. If you’ve missed V O2max workouts, however, you may need to
slow your pace during your next few V O2max sessions to reflect the lost
time. If you’ve lost 10 or more days of training in the 8 weeks before your
marathon, be open to revising your goal. When you resume full training,
gather information from your timed sessions to get a sense of how much
fitness you’ve lost and whether your marathon goal pace needs to be slowed
by at least a few seconds per mile (1.6 km).
Table 8.3 Making Up for Lost Time
Number of days
missed
8 weeks or more until
marathon
Less than 8 weeks until
marathon
<10 Resume schedule Resume schedule
--- PAGE 253 ---
Number of days
missed
8 weeks or more until
marathon
Less than 8 weeks until
marathon
10-20 Resume schedule Revise goal
>20 Revise goal Revise goal
Mother Nature
In general, you’ll just have to deal with bad weather. Sometimes, however,
Mother Nature dishes up a blizzard or blistering-hot weather that’s
counterproductive to continued healthy training. If you can, find a treadmill
indoors or choose an appropriate cross-training activity until the weather
becomes bearable.
As with other factors influencing your marathon preparation, weather
might necessitate some not-so-minor changes in your life. For example, you
might need to alter your normal schedule during oppressive summer heat so
you can get in reasonable training early in the morning. Or if your area has
been snowed under for weeks, you’ll probably need to find a few well-
plowed stretches where you can safely get in your miles.
Try to anticipate weather when picking your marathon goal. If you don’t
run well in the heat and live in a sultry climate, it makes little sense to plan
for a September marathon because your hardest training will need to occur
during the least conducive weather of the year. Similarly, Boston in April
can be a tough goal if you live in an area where winter running is a daily
challenge.
The Real World
For most people, training for a marathon means more time and mental
energy devoted to running. If that’s true for you, don’t set an ambitious
marathon goal when you know the rest of your life will be busier than
usual. Once you’ve picked your marathon and have decided how long
you’ll prepare for it, try to anticipate and eliminate factors that would
significantly interfere with your training.
--- PAGE 254 ---
WHY (AND HOW) YOU MIGHT
SYSTEMATICALLY TWEAK THE
SCHEDULES
We’ve looked at how to adjust the schedules if you hit one or
more common roadblocks during your buildup. Readers of
previous editions of Advanced Marathoning have also
purposefully adjusted the schedules. Based on emails we’ve
received and online discussions, here are the most common
tweaks to the schedules and our thoughts on them.
Going Longer than the Schedules’ Longest Long
Runs
Readers’ Tweak: This is the schedule adjustment we most
often hear about. Many people say they feel better
prepared on race day having done one or more long runs
that are close to marathon distance. The psychological
benefits of these longer long runs are cited more often than
the physical benefits—having gone longer in training makes
the marathon distance less daunting.
Our Take: The 18-week schedules in chapters 11 and 12
include one 24-mile run. If you’re following a different
schedule, feel that one or two runs of up to 24 miles will
boost your confidence, and you don’t have a history of
injury related to training volume, by all means go ahead!
Doing More Tune-Up Races
Readers’ Tweak: Readers who enjoy racing (and the
feedback it provides on their fitness) add one or more tune-
up races to those called for in the schedules. The most
common way to do this is to replace a V O2max workout or
tempo run with a race. If the tune-up race is on a Saturday
and is on the shorter end of the spectrum, runners will
usually follow it with the long run prescribed for that
--- PAGE 255 ---
Sunday. If the race is more toward half marathon distance,
readers might do a longer-than-usual cool-down and count
the day as the week’s long run.
Our Take: The key here is to get in close to the number of
long runs prescribed in the schedules. If you can add 1 or 2
more tune-up races while still getting in the long runs, by all
means go ahead!
Doing More Frequent V O2max Sessions and Other
Forms of Speed Work
Readers’ Tweak: Some readers simply enjoy hard track
workouts more than tempo runs and replace some of the
latter with the former. These runners are typically relatively
new to the marathon and feel that their speed is one of their
primary assets.
Our Take: The key to marathon preparation is to prepare
your body to run at a steady pace for 26.2 miles. Running a
larger number of hard track workouts is counterproductive
to marathon preparation because those sessions leave you
tired for your more important training and is, therefore, not
recommended.
Reducing the Distance of the Midweek Medium-Long
Run
Readers’ Tweak: Primarily because of feeling pressed for
time or low on energy, some readers purposefully go
shorter than prescribed on the midweek medium-long run.
Many keep this run between 10 to 12 miles throughout their
buildup.
Our Take: This is a tough one; we can empathize with the
difficulty of fitting in the midweek medium-long run,
particularly during the winter months. Those runs are really
beneficial for marathon preparation, so just do your best to
hit the target distance. (For example, squeezing in 12 miles
is better than settling for 10 miles.)
--- PAGE 256 ---
Reaching a Peak Weekly Volume That’s Between
Those in the Schedules
Readers’ Tweak: Some readers feel that one schedule
doesn’t have them running enough but that following the
schedule with the next higher level of weekly volume will
make them injured or too tired, so they aim for a weekly
volume between the two schedules, usually while following
the specific workouts prescribed in the lower-mileage
schedule. For example, while mostly following the schedule
for 55 to 70 miles (89-113 km) per week, readers might hit
75 miles (120 km) for their peak weeks.
Our Take: If it works for you, this is a sensible adjustment, so
by all means go ahead!
Running the Same Weekly Volume on Fewer Days of
Running
Readers’ Tweak: Some readers have found they feel better
if they do the same weekly volume on fewer days of
running. For example, in the up-to-55-miles (89 km)
schedule, they’ll reach the target volume on 4 rather than 5
days per week of running. A typical tweak is to not run on
one of the recovery run days in the schedule and run a little
farther on the other prescribed running days.
Our Take: We can see how this approach may fit your
overall life schedule. If it works for you, by all means go
ahead!
Switching the Schedules to Longer Than a 7-Day
Cycle
Readers’ Tweak: We’ve heard from several masters runners
who spread the schedules’ 7-day training blocks over 8 or
10 or even more days. (Making this change means
extending the number of weeks in your marathon buildup.)
This tweak allows for more recovery after long runs, tempo
runs, and the other most fatiguing workouts.
--- PAGE 257 ---
Our Take: We wholeheartedly endorse this approach for
older marathoners who need more time for recovery than
younger runners. We examine this approach in detail in
chapter 5.
Of course, regardless of how focused you are on your training, you’re
going to have the occasional day when meeting your training goal is
exceedingly difficult, if not impossible. A sick child, an unsympathetic boss,
or a traffic accident all have a way of dashing plans for a high-quality
tempo run. If necessary, juggle the days in the training schedule you’re
following so that you get in the most important workouts while still
allowing for adequate recovery. A good rule of thumb is that if you can do
90 percent of the planned training schedule, your preparation is going really
well.
Now that we’ve looked at the principles behind successful marathon
training and racing and how to implement those principles, let’s get to what
you probably care most about—the training schedules, which constitute the
rest of this book.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 258 ---
T
9
MARATHON TRAINING ON UP
TO 55 MILES (89 KM) PER
WEEK
his chapter is for runners who typically train less than 40 miles (64
km) per week but who are willing to up their mileage to about 55
miles (89 km) per week during marathon preparation. It includes an
18-week and a 12-week schedule. Both plans increase weekly mileage
--- PAGE 259 ---
progressively from about 33 miles (53 km) to a peak of about 55 miles (89
km). We say “about 55 miles” because we provide a mileage range for each
day of training so you can run a bit more or a bit less depending on how
you’re feeling that day.
As discussed in chapter 1, it’s useful to divide your overall training
schedule into training blocks of several weeks each. The training schedules
consist of four blocks, which focus on endurance, lactate threshold (LT) and
endurance, race preparation, and tapering, respectively. A final schedule,
which contains a 5-week post marathon recovery program, can follow either
of the training schedules.
Of the two training schedules presented in this chapter, we recommend
the 18-week schedule for most situations. Eighteen weeks is plenty of time
to stimulate the necessary adaptations to improve your marathon
performance. At the same time, 18 weeks is short enough that you can focus
your efforts without becoming bored with the process.
At times, however, you simply don’t have 18 weeks to prepare for your
marathon. The 12-week schedule includes the same training blocks as the
18-week schedule, but because of the short time for preparation, each block
is abbreviated. If you go into a marathon in a rush, you must realize that
your preparation won’t be as thorough as if you had longer to prepare. The
12-week schedule takes into account that sometimes circumstances don’t
allow you the optimal length of time for preparation and strives to provide a
compact yet effective training program.
BEFORE STARTING THE SCHEDULES
These schedules are challenging right from the start and get harder as your
marathon approaches. So that you can progress as the training increases in
quantity and quality, and to minimize your chances of injury, you should be
able to complete the first week of the schedule without too much effort.
Be realistic in assessing whether you’re ready for the first week of the
schedule. For example, if you’ve been running 20 miles (32 km) per week
and your longest run in the last several weeks was 6 miles (10 km), now
isn’t the time to jump suddenly to a 31- to 36-mile (50-58 km) week
containing an 11- to 12-mile (18-19 km) run and an 8- to 10-mile (13-16
--- PAGE 260 ---
km) run, as the first week of the 18-week schedule calls for. The idea
behind the schedules isn’t to make you as tired as possible as soon as
possible but to apply repeated training stress that you absorb and from
which you benefit.
As a rule, you should be running at least 25 miles (40 km) a week before
starting these schedules, and in the last month you should have comfortably
completed a run close in length to the long run called for in the first week of
the schedule.
READING THE SCHEDULES
The schedules are presented in a day-by-day format. The main limitation
with this approach is that it’s impossible to guess the myriad outside factors
that may influence your day-to-day nonrunning life. Work schedules, family
life, relationships, school commitments, and Mother Nature all play a part
in determining when you get to do your long runs and other aspects of
marathon preparation. You’ll no doubt require some flexibility in your
training and will need to juggle days around from time to time. That’s
expected, and as long as you don’t try to make up for lost time by doing
several hard days in a row, you should be able to avoid injury and
overtraining. By following the principles covered in the earlier chapters,
you’ll be able to safely fine-tune the training schedules to suit your
circumstances.
The schedules express each day’s training in miles and kilometers; use
whichever you’re accustomed to. The mile and kilometer ranges for each
day (and the weekly total) are rough equivalents of each other, not a direct
conversion from one to the other.
FOLLOWING THE SCHEDULES
Each column of the schedules represents a week’s training. For example, in
the 12-week schedule, the column for 11 weeks to goal indicates that at the
end of that week you have 11 weeks until your marathon. The schedules
continue week by week until race week.
--- PAGE 261 ---
We’ve included a specific workout for each day as well as a category of
training for that day. For example, in the 18-week schedule, on the Friday
of the 7-weeks-to-goal column, the specific workout is a 12- to 13-mile (19-
21 km) run, and the category of training for that day is medium-long run.
This aspect of the schedules allows you to quickly see the balance of
training during each week and the progression of workouts from week to
week. Look again at the 18-week schedule—it’s easy to see that with 7
weeks to go until the marathon, there are four recovery days (two of
running, two of rest or cross-training), along with an LT session, a long run,
and a medium-long run. Looking at the row for Sunday, it’s easy to see how
the long runs progress and then taper in the last few weeks before the
marathon.
The workouts are divided into the following eight categories: long runs,
medium-long runs, marathon-pace runs, general aerobic runs, LT runs,
V O2max intervals, recovery runs, and speed training. Each of these
categories is explained in depth in chapter 8, and the physiology behind the
training is explained in chapter 1.
RACING STRATEGIES
We discussed marathon race strategy at length in chapter 7. If you follow
one of the schedules in this chapter, you’re probably a midpack runner.
Unlike the situation the runners at the front of the field often face, you’ll
probably have plenty of people around you to run with from start to finish.
This can be good and bad.
On the plus side, obviously, you’re less likely to face lonely stretches
with nobody to run with. Use this probability to your advantage—soon after
the start, try to find other runners who look capable of maintaining your
goal pace through at least 20 miles (32 km), and encourage them to work
with you.
By following one of schedules in this chapter, you’ll be better able to
hold up past 20 miles (32 km) than most of the runners who begin the race
at your pace. Your superior preparation will mean you’ll have the pleasure
of continually passing people until the finish. Look forward to this time.
Pick a runner a few hundred yards or meters up the road, and set the short-
--- PAGE 262 ---
term goal of catching them. Then go after your next victim, and keep doing
so until the finish.
On the not-so-good side, you’re more likely than those at the front of the
field to feel crowded in the early miles. Try not to let this upset you. Tell
yourself that the crowds are helping you not to go out too fast, and if need
be, work up gradually to your goal pace.
Don’t try to make up lost time suddenly if a break in the crowd appears.
Instead, when you have clear running room, run no more than 10 seconds
per mile (1.6 km) faster than goal pace until you’re back on schedule; you’ll
burn less glycogen and be less likely to accumulate lactate by catching up
gradually. If the deficit you have to make up isn’t too great, 5 seconds per
mile (1.6 km) faster than goal pace is an even safer approach. Once you’re
back on track, ease back to goal pace.
AFTER THE MARATHON
The final schedule in this chapter is a 5-week recovery schedule for after
the marathon; it completes the training program and leaves you ready to
prepare for future challenges. This schedule is appropriate whether you
followed the 12- or 18-week marathon-prep schedule.
The recovery schedule is purposely conservative. You have little to gain
by rushing back into training, and your risk of injury is elevated at this
point, owing to the reduced resiliency of your muscles and connective
tissue after the marathon.
The schedule starts with 2 days off from running, which is the bare
minimum of time away from running you should allow yourself. If you still
have acute soreness or tightness so severe that it will alter your form, or if
you just don’t feel like running, take more than 2 days off. If ever there was
a time to lose your marathoner’s mindset, the week after your goal race is it.
Even most of the top runners in the world take days off after a marathon.
They know that the nearly negligible benefits of a short run at this time are
far outweighed by the risks. Not running now also increases your chances
of being inspired to resume hard training when your body allows it.
Of course, some people don’t consider themselves real runners unless
they run pretty much every day of their lives. Plod through a few miles if
--- PAGE 263 ---
you must, but be aware that you’re likely prolonging your recovery.
What better aids recovery during this time is light cross-training, such as
swimming or cycling. These activities increase blood flow through your
muscles without subjecting them to pounding. Walking will also achieve
this in the week after the marathon.
One way to ensure that you don’t run too hard too soon after your
marathon is to use a heart rate monitor. As discussed in chapter 3, a heart
rate monitor can help prevent you from going too fast on recovery days.
During the first few weeks after the marathon, keep your heart rate below
75 percent of your maximal heart rate or 66 percent of your heart rate
reserve. Running at this intensity will help your body overcome the stress of
the marathon as quickly as possible.
During this 5-week recovery schedule, the number of days of running
per week increases from 3 to 5. At the end of the 5 weeks, you should be
fully recovered from the marathon and, with a little luck, injury free and
mentally fresh.
Up to 55 Miles per Week 18-Week Schedule
Training Block 1—Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
17 16 15 14 13
(Recovery)
12
Monday Rest or
cross-
train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-
train
Rest or
cross-
train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Tuesday LT
8-9 miles
(13-14
km) with
20-25
minutes
at LT
pace
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
with 6 × 10
sec hill
sprints + 8
× 100 m
strides
Gen-
aerobic
9-10
miles (14-
16 km)
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles
(13-14
km) with 6
× 10 sec
hill sprints
+ 8 × 100
m strides
LT
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
with 30-35
minutes at
LT pace
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
7-8 miles
(11-13 km)
with 10 ×
100 m
strides
--- PAGE 264 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
17 16 15 14 13
(Recovery)
12
WednesdayRest or
cross-
train
Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Thursday Gen-
aerobic
8-10
miles (13-
16 km)
Gen-
aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
LT
8-9 miles
(13-14
km) with
25-30
minutes
at LT
pace
Gen-
aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16
km)
Gen-
aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Gen-
aerobic
7-9 miles
(11-14 km)
Friday Rest or
cross-
train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-
train
Rest or
cross-
train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Saturday Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Sunday Med-long
run
11-12
miles (18-
19 km)
Marathon-
pace run
12-14
miles (19-
23 km)
with 8
miles (13
km) at
marathon
pace
Med-long
run
14-15
miles (23-
24 km)
Long run
15-17
miles (24-
27 km)
Marathon-
pace run
15-17
miles (24-
27 km)
with 10
miles (16
km) at
marathon
pace
Med-long
run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
Weekly
volume
31-36
miles (50-
58 km)
33-38
miles (53-
61 km)
39-44
miles (63-
71 km)
40-47
miles (64-
76 km)
42-48
miles (68-
77 km)
33-40 miles
(53-64 km)
Training Block 2—LT + Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 (Recovery) 87
--- PAGE 265 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 (Recovery) 87
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or
cross-train
Tuesday LT
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
with 30-35
minutes at
LT pace
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
with 6 × 100
m strides
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-
14 km)
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
with 6 × 100
m strides
WednesdayRecovery
4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Med-long
run
12-13 miles
(19-21 km)
Med-long run
13-14 miles
(21-23 km)
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with
6 × 600 m at
5K race pace;
jog 50%-90%
interval time
LT
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
with 35-45
minutes at
LT pace
Thursday Med-long run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Rest or
cross-train
Friday Rest or
cross-train
LT
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
with 35-40
minutes at
LT pace
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Med-long
run
12-13 miles
(19-21 km)
Saturday Gen-aerobic
+ speed
7-8 miles
(11-13 km)
with 6 × 10
sec hill
sprints + 8 ×
100 m
strides
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery +
speed
5-6 miles (8-
10 km) with 6
× 100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
7-8 miles (11-
13 km) with 6
× 10 sec hill
sprints + 8 ×
100 m strides
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Sunday Long run
17-19 miles
(27-31 km)
Long run
19-21 miles
(31-34 km)
Marathon-
pace run
16-17 miles
(26-27 km)
with 12 miles
(19 km) at
Med-long run
13-14 miles
(21-23 km)
Long run
19-21 miles
(31-34 km)
--- PAGE 266 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 (Recovery) 87
marathon
pace
Weekly
volume
48-54 miles
(77-87 km)
51-57 miles
(82-92 km)
46-51 miles
(74-82 km)
40-45 miles
(64-72 km)
52-59 miles
(84-95 km)
Training Block 3—Race Preparation
WEEKS TO GOAL
6 5 4 3
Monday Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Tuesday Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles (16-
18 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles (16-
18 km)
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 6 × 100
m strides
Wednesday1O2max
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 5 × 600
m at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
V O2max
9-11 miles (14-18
km) with 5 × 1
km at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90% interval
time
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 5 × 600
m at 5K race
pace; jog 50-
90% interval
time
V O2max
9-10 miles (14-
16 km) with 5 × 1
km at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Thursday Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Friday Recovery +
speed
4-5 miles (6-8
km) with 6 × 100
m strides
Med-long run
11-12 miles (18-
19 km)
Recovery +
speed
4-5 miles (6-8
km) with 6 × 100
m strides
Med-long run
11-12 miles (18-
19 km)
Saturday 8K-15K tune-up
race
(total 10-13
miles [16-21
km])
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
8K-15K tune-up
race
(total 10-13
miles [16-21
km])
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
--- PAGE 267 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
6 5 4 3
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km)
Marathon-pace
run
17-18 miles (27-
29 km) with 14
miles (23 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km)
Long run
19-21 miles (31-
34 km)
Weekly
volume
48-55 miles (77-
89 km)
48-54 miles (77-
87 km)
48-55 miles (77-
89 km)
49-55 miles (79-
88 km)
Training Block 4—Taper and Race
WEEKS TO GOAL
2 1 Race week
Monday Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train Rest
Tuesday Gen-aerobic + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km) with
6 × 10 sec hill sprints + 10
x 100 m strides
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 8 × 100 m strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
WednesdayRecovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14 km)
with 5 × 1 km at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90% interval time
Dress rehearsal
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
with 2 miles (3 km)
at marathon pace
Thursday Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train Rest
Friday Recovery + speed
4-5 miles (6-8 km) with 6 ×
100 m strides
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km) with
6 × 100 m strides
Recovery + speed
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Saturday 8K-10K tune-up race (total
9-12 miles [14-19 km])
Rest or cross-train Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27 km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21 km)
Goal marathon
Weekly
volume
41-48 miles (66-77 km)31-35 miles (50-56 km)16-21 miles (26-34
km)
(6 days prerace)
--- PAGE 268 ---
Up to 55 Miles per Week 12-Week Schedule
Training Block 1—Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 8
Monday Rest or cross-trainRest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-trainRest or cross-
train
Tuesday Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 6 × 10
sec hill sprints + 8
× 100 m strides
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-
16 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 6 × 10
sec hill sprints + 8
× 100 m strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
WednesdayRest or cross-trainRest or cross-
train
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
LT
10-11 miles
(16-18 km) with
25-30 minutes
at LT pace
Thursday Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-14
km)
LT
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 20-
25 minutes at
LT pace
Med-long run
11-12 miles (18-
19 km)
Med-long run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
Friday Rest or cross-trainRest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-trainRest or cross-
train
Saturday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Sunday Marathon-pace
run
12-13 miles (19-
21 km) with 8
miles (13 km) at
marathon pace
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Marathon-pace
run
15-16 miles (24-
26 km) with 10
miles (16 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
16-17 miles
(26-27 km)
Weekly
volume
33-37 miles (53-
60 km)
36-40 miles
(58-64 km)
42-47 miles (68-
76 km)
46-51 miles
(74-82 km)
--- PAGE 269 ---
Training Block 2—LT + Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
(Recovery) 7 6 5
Monday Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train
Tuesday Rest or cross-train Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
WednesdayGen-aerobic
10-11 miles (16-18
km)
V O2max
10-11 miles (16-18 km)
with 5 × 1 km at 5K race
pace; jog 50%-90%
interval time
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21
km)
Thursday Rest or cross-train Med-long run
11-12 miles (18-19 km)
Rest or cross-train
Friday LT
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
with 25-30 minutes at
LT pace
Rest or cross-train LT
11-12 miles (18-19
km) with 30-40
minutes at LT pace
Saturday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km) with
6 × 100 m strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Sunday Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-24
km)
Marathon-pace run
16-17 miles (26-27 km)
with 12 miles (19 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
19-20 miles (31-32
km)
Weekly
volume
38-42 miles (61-68
km)
47-52 miles (76-84 km)52-57 miles (84-92
km)
Training Block 3—Race Preparation
WEEKS TO GOAL
4 3 2
Monday Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train
Tuesday Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Recovery + speed Gen-aerobic + speed
--- PAGE 270 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
4 3 2
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 6 × 100 m strides
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 6 × 10 sec hill
sprints + 10 x 100m
strides
Wednesday1O2max
8-9 miles (13-14 km)
with 5 × 600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90% interval time
V O2max
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
with 5 × 1 km at 5K race
pace; jog 50%-90%
interval time
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Thursday Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train
Friday Recovery + speed
4-5 miles (6-8 km) with
6 × 100 m strides
Med-long run
11-12 miles (18-19 km)
Recovery + speed
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Saturday 8K-15K tune-up race
(total 10-13 miles [16-21
km])
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
8K-10K tune-up race
(total 9-12 miles [14-
19 km])
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27 km)
Long run
19-21 miles (31-34 km)
Long run
16-17 miles (26-27
km)
Weekly
volume
47-54 miles (76-87 km)49-55 miles (79-89 km)41-48 miles (66-77
km)
Training Block 4—Taper and Race
WEEKS TO GOAL
1 Race week
Monday Rest or cross-train Rest
Tuesday Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with 8 × 100 m
strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Wednesday1O2max
8-9 miles (13-14 km) with 5 × 1 km at 5K
race pace; jog 50%-90% interval time
Dress rehearsal
5-6 miles (8-10 km) with 2
miles (3 km) at marathon pace
--- PAGE 271 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
1 Race week
Thursday Rest or cross-train Rest
Friday Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km) with 6 × 100 m
strides
Recovery + speed
4-5 miles (6-8 km) with 6 ×
100 m strides
Saturday Rest or cross-train Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21 km)
Goal marathon
Weekly
volume
31-35 miles (50-56 km) 16-21 miles (26-34 km) (6
days prerace)
Up to 55 Miles per Week
Training Block 5—Postmarathon Recovery
WEEKS AFTER THE MARATHON
1 2 3 4 5
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Tuesday Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Gen-aerobic
7-8 miles (11-
13 km)
Gen-aerobic
7-8 miles (11-
13 km)
WednesdayRecovery
3-4 miles
(5-6 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Thursday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Friday Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
7-8 miles (11-
13 km) with 8
× 100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
7-8 miles (11-
13 km) with 8
× 100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
7-8 miles (11-
13 km) with 8
× 100 m
strides
--- PAGE 272 ---
WEEKS AFTER THE MARATHON
1 2 3 4 5
Saturday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Sunday Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-
14 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Med-long run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
Weekly
volume
12-15
miles (19-
24 km)
19-23
miles (31-
37 km)
24-28 miles
(39-45 km)
28-32 miles
(45-51 km)
33-38 miles
(53-61 km)
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 273 ---
T
10
MARATHON TRAINING ON 55
TO 70 MILES (89-113 KM) PER
WEEK
his chapter is for mid- to high-mileage marathoners. It includes an
18-week and a 12-week schedule. Both schedules increase weekly
--- PAGE 274 ---
mileage progressively from about 55 miles (89 km) to a peak of about 70
miles (113 km). We say “about 70 miles” because we provide a mileage
range for each day of training so you can run a bit more or a bit less
depending on how you’re feeling that day.
As discussed in chapter 1, it’s useful to divide your overall training
schedule into training blocks of several weeks each. The training schedules
consist of four blocks, which focus on endurance, lactate threshold (LT) and
endurance, race preparation, and tapering, respectively. A final schedule,
which contains a 5-week post marathon recovery program, can follow either
of the training schedules.
Of the two training schedules presented in this chapter, we recommend
the 18-week schedule for most situations. Eighteen weeks is plenty of time
to stimulate the necessary adaptations to improve your marathon
performance. At the same time, 18 weeks is short enough that you can focus
your efforts without becoming bored with the process.
At times, however, you simply don’t have 18 weeks to prepare for your
marathon. The 12-week schedule includes the same training blocks as the
18-week schedules, but because of the short time for preparation, each
block is abbreviated. If you go into a marathon in a rush, you must realize
that your preparation won’t be as thorough as if you had longer to prepare.
The 12-week schedule takes into account that sometimes circumstances
don’t allow you the optimal length of time for preparation and strives to
provide a compact yet effective training program.
BEFORE STARTING THE SCHEDULES
These schedules are challenging right from the start and get harder as your
marathon approaches. So that you can progress as the training increases in
quantity and quality and to minimize your chances of injury, you should be
able to complete the first week of the schedule without too much effort.
Be realistic in assessing whether you’re ready for the first week of the
schedule. For example, if you’ve been running 30 miles (48 km) per week
and your longest run in the last several weeks was 8 miles (13 km), now
isn’t the time to jump suddenly to a 48- to 57-mile (77-92 km) week
containing a 13- to 15-mile (21-24 km) run and an 11- to 12-mile (18-19
--- PAGE 275 ---
km) run, as the first week of the 18-week schedule calls for. The idea
behind the schedules isn’t to make you as tired as possible as soon as
possible but to apply repeated training stress that you absorb and from
which you benefit.
As a rule, you should be running at least 45 miles (72 km) a week before
starting these schedules, and in the last month you should have comfortably
completed a run close in length to the long run called for in the first week of
the schedule.
READING THE SCHEDULES
The schedules are presented in a day-by-day format. The main limitation
with this approach is that it’s impossible to guess the myriad of outside
factors that may influence your day-to-day nonrunning life. Work
schedules, family life, relationships, school commitments, and Mother
Nature all play a part in determining when you get to do your long runs and
other aspects of marathon preparation. You’ll no doubt require some
flexibility in your training and will need to juggle days around from time to
time. That’s expected, and as long as you don’t try to make up for lost time
by doing several hard days in a row, you should be able to avoid injury and
overtraining. By following the principles covered in the earlier chapters,
you’ll be able to safely fine-tune the training schedules to suit your
circumstances.
The schedules express each day’s training in miles and kilometers; use
whichever you’re accustomed to. The mile and kilometer ranges for each
day (and the weekly total) are rough equivalents of each other, not a direct
conversion from one to the other.
FOLLOWING THE SCHEDULES
Each column of the schedules represents a week’s training. For example, in
the 12-week schedule, the column for 11 weeks to goal indicates that at the
end of that week you have 11 weeks until your marathon. The schedules
continue week by week until race week.
--- PAGE 276 ---
We’ve included a specific workout for each day as well as a category of
training for that day. For example, in the 18-week schedule, on the Tuesday
of the 7-weeks-to-go column, the specific workout is a 6- to 7-mile (10-11
km) run, and the category of training for that day is recovery. This aspect of
the schedules allows you to quickly see the balance of training during each
week and the progression of workouts from week to week. Look again at
the 18-week schedule—it’s easy to see that with 7 weeks to go until the
marathon, there are four recovery days that week, along with an LT session,
a long run, and a medium-long run. Looking at the row for Sunday, it’s easy
to see how the long runs progress and then taper in the last few weeks
before the marathon.
The workouts are divided into the following eight categories: long runs,
medium-long runs, marathon-pace runs, general aerobic runs, LT runs,
V O2max intervals, recovery runs, and speed training. Each of these
categories is explained in depth in chapter 8, and the physiology behind the
training is explained in chapter 1.
RACING STRATEGIES
We discussed marathon race strategy at length in chapter 7. Part of that
discussion centered on running with a group when possible. If you follow
one of the schedules in this chapter, you might well be finishing within the
top quarter or third of the field in your marathon. That means you’re likely
to have runners around you throughout the marathon, especially in a big-
city race, but there won’t be so many people in front of you at the start that
you’ll spend the first few miles navigating around crowds. Make use of this
probable position within the field; once you feel as if you’re running
comfortably at your goal pace, look around for other runners who appear
able to sustain the pace until the end. Talk to them, ask what their goals are,
and try to find others to run with.
In chapter 7, we also discussed the importance of a conservative early
pace. If you run intelligently in the early part of the race, you’ll have
runners to pick off regularly in the last 10 miles (16 km) or so because
others who are either less prepared or more foolhardy will come back to
you.
--- PAGE 277 ---
AFTER THE MARATHON
The final schedule in this chapter is a 5-week recovery schedule for after
the marathon; it completes the training program and leaves you ready to
prepare for future challenges. This schedule is appropriate whether you
followed the 12- or 18-week marathon-prep schedule.
The recovery schedule is purposely conservative. You have little to gain
by rushing back into training, and your risk of injury is elevated at this
point, owing to the reduced resiliency of your muscles and connective
tissue after the marathon.
The schedule starts with 2 days off from running, which is the bare
minimum of time away from running you should allow yourself. If you still
have acute soreness or tightness so severe that it will alter your form, or if
you just don’t feel like running, take more than 2 days off. If ever there was
a time to lose your marathoner’s mindset, the week after your goal race is it.
Even most of the top runners in the world take days off after a marathon.
They know that the nearly negligible benefits of a short run at this time are
far outweighed by the risks. Not running now will also increase your
chances of being inspired to resume hard training when your body allows it.
Of course, some people don’t consider themselves real runners unless
they run pretty much every day of their lives. Plod through a few miles if
you must, but be aware that you’re likely prolonging your recovery.
What better aids recovery during this time is light cross-training, such as
swimming or cycling. These activities increase blood flow through your
muscles without subjecting them to pounding. Walking will also achieve
this in the week after the marathon.
One way to ensure that you don’t run too hard too soon after your
marathon is to use a heart rate monitor. As discussed in chapter 3, a heart
rate monitor can help prevent you from going too fast on recovery days.
During the first few weeks after the marathon, keep your heart rate below
75 percent of your maximal heart rate or 66 percent of your heart rate
reserve. Running at this intensity will help your body overcome the stress of
the marathon as quickly as possible.
During this 5-week recovery schedule, the number of days of running
per week increases from 3 to 5. At the end of the 5 weeks, you should be
--- PAGE 278 ---
fully recovered from the marathon and, with a little luck, injury free and
mentally fresh.
55 to 70 Miles per Week 18-Week Schedule
Training Block 1—Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
17 16 15 14 13
(Recovery)
12
Monday Rest or
cross-
train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-
train
Rest or
cross-
train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Tuesday LT
8-9 miles
(13-14
km) with
20-25
minutes
at LT
pace
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
7-9 miles
(11-14 km)
with 6 × 10
sec hill
sprints + 8
× 100 m
strides
Gen-
aerobic
9-10
miles (14-
16 km)
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles
(13-14
km) with 6
× 10 sec
hill sprints
+ 8 × 100
m strides
LT
8-10 miles
(13-16 km)
with 30-35
minutes at
LT pace
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
|with 10 ×
100 m
strides
WednesdayMed-long
run
11-12
miles (18-
19 km)
Med-long
run
11-13
miles (18-
21km)
Med-long
run
12-14
miles (19-
23 km)
Med-long
run
13-15
miles (21-
24 km)
Med-long
run
13-15
miles (21-
24 km)
Med-long
run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
Thursday Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Friday Gen-
aerobic
8-9 miles
(13-14
km)
Gen-
aerobic
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
LT
9-10
miles (14-
16 km)
with 25-
30
minutes
at LT
pace
Gen-
aerobic
10-11
miles (16-
18 km)
Gen-
aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Gen-
aerobic
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
--- PAGE 279 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
17 16 15 14 13
(Recovery)
12
Saturday Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Sunday Med-long
run
13-15
miles (21-
24 km)
Marathon-
pace run
15-16
miles (24-
26 km)
with 8
miles (13
km) at
marathon
pace
Med-long
run
14-15
miles (23-
24 km)
Long run
17-18
miles (27-
29 km)
Marathon-
pace run
17-18
miles (27-
29 km)
with 10
miles (16
km) at
marathon
pace
Med-long
run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Weekly
volume
48-57
miles (77-
92 km)
49-59
miles (79-
95 km)
52-61
miles (84-
98 km)
56-65
miles (90-
105 km)
55-64
miles (89-
103 km)
49-55 miles
(79-89 km)
Training Block 2—LT + Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 (Recovery) 87
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or
cross-train
Tuesday LT
9-11 miles
(14-18 km)
with 30-35
minutes at
LT pace
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-
14 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
WednesdayMed-long
run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Med-long
run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 7 ×
600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Med-long
run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
--- PAGE 280 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 (Recovery) 87
Thursday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Friday Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
LT
10-12 miles
(16-19 km)
with 35-40
minutes at
LT pace
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
LT
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
with 35-45
minutes at
LT pace
Saturday Gen-aerobic
+ speed
7-8 miles
(11-13 km)
with 6 × 10
sec hill
sprints + 10
× 100 m
strides
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
with
6 × 100 m
strides
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles (10-
11 km) with 8 ×
10 sec hill
sprints + 8 ×
100 m strides
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Sunday Long run
19-21 miles
(31-34 km)
Long run
19-21 miles
(31-34 km)
Marathon-
pace run
18-19 miles
(29-31 km)
with 12 miles
(19 km) at
marathon
pace
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Long run
21-22 miles
(34-35 km)
Weekly
volume
63-71 miles
(101-114
km)
61-69 miles
(98-111 km)
59-65 miles
(95-105 km)
52-58 miles
(84-93 km)
64-70 miles
(103-113
km)
Training Block 3—Race Preparation
WEEKS TO GOAL
6 5 4 3
Monday Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Tuesday Gen-aerobic V O2max Gen-aerobic Recovery
--- PAGE 281 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
6 5 4 3
10-11 miles (16-
18 km)
10-12 miles (16-
19 km) with 6 × 1
km at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
9-10 miles (14-
16 km)
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
Wednesday1O2max
10-11 miles (16-
18 km) with 5 ×
600 m at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-
24 km)
V O2max
9-10 miles (14-
16 km) with 5 ×
600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
V O2max
11-12 miles (18-
19 km) with 6 ×
1 km at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Thursday Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 6 × 100
m strides
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 6 × 100
m strides
Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-
24 km)
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
Saturday 8K-15K tune-up
race
(total 10-14
miles [16-23
km])
Recovery
5-7 miles (8-11
km)
8K-15K tune-up
race
(total 10-14
miles [16-23
km])
Recovery
5-7 miles (8-11
km)
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km)
Marathon-pace
run
19-20 miles (31-
32 km) with 14
miles (23 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km)
Long run
19-21 miles (31-
34 km)
Weekly
volume
57-66 miles (92-
106 km)
63-71 miles (101-
114 km)
55-64 miles (89-
103 km)
63-71 miles
(101-114 km)
--- PAGE 282 ---
Training Block 4—Taper and Race
WEEKS TO GOAL
2 1 Race week
Monday Rest or cross-train Rest Rest
Tuesday Gen-aerobic + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 6 × 10 sec hill
sprints + 12 × 100 m
strides
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with
8 × 100 m strides
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
WednesdayGen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Dress rehearsal
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 2 miles (3 km)
at marathon pace
Thursday Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 6 × 100 m strides
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14 km) with
5 × 1 km at 5K race pace;
jog 50%-90% interval
time
Recovery
3-4 miles (5-6 km)
Friday Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery + speed
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Saturday 8K-10K tune-up race
(total 10-12 miles [16-
19 km])
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km) with 8
× 100 m strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27 km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21 km)
Goal marathon
Weekly
volume
52-59 miles (84-95 km)40-46 miles (64-74 km)21-27 miles (34-43
km)
(6 days prerace)
55 to 70 Miles per Week 12-Week Schedule
--- PAGE 283 ---
Training Block 1—Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 8
Monday Rest or cross-trainRest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-trainRest or cross-
train
Tuesday Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 6 × 10
sec hill sprints + 8
× 100 m strides
Med-long run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 6 × 10
sec hill sprints + 8
× 100 m strides
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-
16 km)
WednesdayMed-long run
11-12 miles (18-
19 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-
16 km)
Med-long run
13-14 miles (21-
23 km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Thursday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Friday Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
LT
9-10 miles (14-
16 km) with 20-
25 minutes at
LT pace
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
LT
10-11 miles
(16-18 km) with
25-30 minutes
at LT pace
Saturday Recovery
4-6 miles (6-10
km)
Recovery
4-6 miles (6-10
km)
Recovery
4-6 miles (6-10
km)
Recovery
4-6 miles (6-10
km)
Sunday Marathon-pace
run
15-16 miles (24-
26 km) with 8
miles (13 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
16-18 miles
(26-29 km)
Marathon-pace
run
17-18 miles (27-
29 km) with 10
miles (16 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
17-19 miles
(27-31 km)
Weekly
volume
52-59 miles (84-
95 km)
54-62 miles
(87-100 km)
56-63 miles (90-
101 km)
59-67 miles
(95-108 km)
--- PAGE 284 ---
Training Block 2—LT + Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
(Recovery) 7 6 5
Monday Rest or cross-trainRest or cross-train Rest or cross-train
Tuesday Gen-aerobic + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 10 × 100 m
strides
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 8 × 100 m
strides
WednesdayMed-long run
11-12 miles (18-19
km)
V O2max
11-12 miles (18-19 km) with
6 × 1 km at 5K race pace;
jog 50%-90% interval time
Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-24
km)
Thursday Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-24 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
Friday LT
9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 25-30
minutes at LT pace
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
LT
11-12 miles (18-19
km) with 30-40
minutes at LT pace
Saturday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Sunday Long run
15-16 miles (24-26
km)
Marathon-pace run
18-19 miles (29-31 km) with
12 miles (19 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
19-21 miles (31-34
km)
Weekly
volume
51-57 miles (82-92
km)
64-70 miles (103-113 km)63-70 miles (101-
113 km)
Training Block 3—Race Preparation
WEEKS TO GOAL
4 3 2
Monday Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train
Tuesday Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Gen-aerobic + speed
--- PAGE 285 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
4 3 2
9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 6 × 10 sec
hill sprints + 12 × 100
m strides
Wednesday1O2max
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
with 5 × 600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90% interval time
V O2max
10-11 miles (16-18 km)
with 6 × 1 km at 5K race
pace; jog 50%-90%
interval time
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-14 km)
Thursday Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 6 × 100 m strides
Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-24 km)
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-14 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Saturday 8K-15K tune-up race
(total 10-14 miles [16-23
km])
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
8K-10K tune-up race
(total 10-12 miles [16-
19 km])
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27 km)
Long run
19-21 miles (31-34 km)
Long run
16-17 miles (26-27
km)
Weekly
volume
55-64 miles (89-103
km)
63-70 miles (101-113
km)
52-59 miles (84-95
km)
Training Block 4—Taper and Race
WEEKS TO GOAL
1 Race week
Monday Rest or cross-train Rest
Tuesday Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with 10 × 100 m
strides
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
WednesdayRecovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Dress rehearsal
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with 2
miles (3 km) at marathon pace
--- PAGE 286 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
1 Race week
Thursday V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14 km) with 5 × 1 km at
5K race pace; jog 50%-90% interval
time
Recovery
3-4 miles (5-6 km)
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery + speed
4-5 miles (6-8 km) with 6 × 100
m strides
Saturday Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km) with 10 × 100 m
strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21 km)
Goal marathon
Weekly
volume
40-46 miles (64-74 km) 21-27 miles (34-43 km) (6 days
prerace)
55 to 70 Miles per Week
Training Block 5—Postmarathon Recovery
WEEKS AFTER THE MARATHON
1 2 3 4 5
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Tuesday Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
WednesdayRecovery
3-4 miles
(5-6 km)
Recovery
4-6 miles
(6-10 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Gen-aerobic
7-8 miles (11-
13 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-
14 km)
Thursday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Friday Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
Gen-aerobic +
speed
Gen-aerobic +
speed
--- PAGE 287 ---
WEEKS AFTER THE MARATHON
1 2 3 4 5
7-8 miles (11-
13 km) with 8
× 100 m
strides
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 8
× 100 m
strides
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 8
× 100 m
strides
Saturday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Sunday Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Gen-
aerobic
7-8 miles
(11-13 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-
14 km)
Med-long run
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
Med-long run
11-13 miles
(18-21 km)
Weekly
volume
12-15
miles (19-
24 km)
20-25
miles (32-
40 km)
28-33 miles
(45-53 km)
33-38 miles
(53-61 km)
38-44 miles
(61-71 km)
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 288 ---
T
11
MARATHON TRAINING ON 70
TO 85 MILES (113-137 KM) PER
WEEK
his chapter is for high-mileage marathoners. It includes an 18-week
and a 12-week schedule. Both schedules increase weekly mileage
--- PAGE 289 ---
progressively from about 65 miles (105 km) to a peak of about 85 miles
(137 km). We say “about 85 miles” because we provide a mileage range for
each day of training so you can run a bit more or a bit less depending on
how you’re feeling that day.
As discussed in chapter 1, it’s useful to divide your overall training
schedule into training blocks of several weeks each. The training schedules
consist of four blocks, which focus on endurance, lactate threshold (LT) and
endurance, race preparation, and tapering, respectively. A final schedule,
which contains a 5-week post marathon recovery program, can follow either
of the training schedules.
Of the two training schedules presented in this chapter, we recommend
the 18-week schedule for most situations. Eighteen weeks is plenty of time
to stimulate the necessary adaptations to improve your marathon
performance. At the same time, 18 weeks is short enough that you can focus
your efforts without becoming bored with the process.
At times, however, you simply don’t have 18 weeks to prepare for your
marathon. The 12-week schedule includes the same training blocks as the
18-week schedule, but because of the short time for preparation, each block
is abbreviated. If you go into a marathon in a rush, you must realize that
your preparation won’t be as thorough as if you had longer to prepare. The
12-week schedule takes into account that sometimes circumstances don’t
allow you the optimal length of time for preparation and strives to provide a
compact yet effective training program.
BEFORE STARTING THE SCHEDULES
These schedules are challenging right from the start and get harder as your
marathon approaches. So that you can progress as the training increases in
quantity and quality and to minimize your chances of injury, you should be
able to complete the first week of the schedule without too much effort.
Be realistic in assessing whether you’re ready for the first week of the
schedule. For example, if you’ve been running 40 miles (64 km) per week
and your longest run in the last several weeks was 10 miles (16 km), now
isn’t the time to suddenly jump to a 60- to 68-mile (97-109 km) week
containing a 16- to 17-mile (26-27 km) run, as the first week of the 18-week
--- PAGE 290 ---
schedule calls for. The idea behind the schedules isn’t to make you as tired
as possible as soon as possible but to apply repeated training stress that you
absorb and from which you benefit.
As a rule, you should be running at least 55 miles (89 km) a week before
starting these schedules, and in the last month, you should have comfortably
completed a run close in length to the long run called for in the first week of
the schedule.
READING THE SCHEDULES
The schedules are presented in a day-by-day format. The main limitation
with this approach is that it’s impossible to guess the myriad of outside
factors that may influence your day-to-day nonrunning life (assuming you
still have one at this level of volume). Work schedules, family life,
relationships, school commitments, and Mother Nature all play a part in
determining when you get to do your long runs and other aspects of
marathon preparation. You’ll no doubt require some flexibility in your
training and will need to juggle days around from time to time. That’s
expected, and as long as you don’t try to make up for lost time by doing
several hard days in a row, you should be able to avoid injury and
overtraining. By following the principles covered in the earlier chapters,
you will be able to safely fine-tune the training schedules to suit your
circumstances.
The schedules express each day’s training in miles and kilometers; use
whichever you’re accustomed to. The mile and kilometer ranges for each
day (and the weekly total) are rough equivalents of each other, not a direct
conversion from one to the other.
FOLLOWING THE SCHEDULES
Each column of the schedules represents a week’s training. For example, in
the 12-week schedule, the column for 11 weeks to goal indicates that at the
end of that week you have 11 weeks until your marathon. The schedules
continue week by week until race week.
--- PAGE 291 ---
We’ve included a specific workout for each day as well as a category of
training for that day. For example, in the 18-week schedule, on the Monday
of the 7-weeks-to-go column, the specific workouts are a 6- to 7-mile (10-
11 km) run and a 4- to 5-mile (6-8 km) run, and the category of training for
that day is recovery. This aspect of the schedules allows you to quickly see
the balance of training during each week and the progression of workouts
from week to week. Look again at the 18-week schedule—it’s easy to see
that with 7 weeks to go until the marathon, there are three recovery days
that week, plus a general aerobic run, an LT session, a long run, and a
medium-long run. Looking at the row for Sunday, it’s easy to see how the
long runs progress and then taper in the last few weeks before the marathon.
The workouts are divided into the following eight categories: long runs,
medium-long runs, marathon-pace runs, general aerobic runs, LT runs,
V O2max intervals, recovery runs, and speed training. Each of these
categories is explained in depth in chapter 8, and the physiology behind the
training is explained in chapter 1.
DOING DOUBLES
As discussed in chapter 8, sometimes marathoners benefit from running
twice a day. This is obviously the case for elites cranking out 130-mile (209
km) weeks, but it can also be true for anyone running more than 70 miles
(113 km) a week. In these schedules, for example, recovery days of 10
miles (16 km) are often broken into two short runs. Rather than making you
more tired, splitting your mileage like this on easy days will speed your
recovery because each run will increase blood flow to your muscles yet take
little out of you.
As we mention at the beginning of this chapter, we know that not
everyone will be able to follow these schedules exactly as they appear. That
applies on the days that call for an LT workout in the morning and an easy
recovery run in the evening. If your schedule makes it more likely that
you’ll do a high-quality tempo run in the evening rather than the morning,
simply flip the workouts prescribed for these days. Just be sure to make the
short morning run a true recovery run.
--- PAGE 292 ---
RACING STRATEGIES
We discussed marathon race strategy at length in chapter 7. If you follow
one of the schedules in this chapter, you’ll probably find yourself near the
front part of the field once everyone settles into their paces. Still, you might
be running with people who aren’t as well prepared as you (e.g., a fit-
looking man in his late 20s whose goal is to break 3:00, more because it’s a
nice round number than because that’s what his training has prepared him
for). If you wind up in a group early on, talk to the others to get a sense of
whom you can count on still being there with 10 miles (16 km) to go.
Because of your strong preparation followed by an effective taper, you’ll
probably find your goal pace in the early miles quite easy. After all, you
were doing long runs with lengthy sections at goal pace in the midst of your
heaviest training. Now that you’re rested and filled with race-day
excitement, goal pace should feel eminently doable. You’ll need to be
disciplined and resist the temptation to go too fast so that you can use your
fitness in the second half of the race and run even splits. Although your
outstanding preparation makes you less likely than most to overextend
yourself late in the race from a too-hasty start, there’s still no point in
squandering months of hard work with an overly ambitious early pace.
Michael Brandt
Fastest marathon: 2:40:32 (Chicago, 2023)
Michael Brandt illustrates the point that you never know how
fast you might be until you try.
--- PAGE 293 ---
Description
A soccer player in high school, Brandt ran a few times a
week in college to be in shape for ultimate frisbee. He found
himself running more after college because, as he puts it, “It’s
hard to coordinate getting 12 people together to play soccer.”
He discovered that he liked the solitude running allowed. Also,
as someone with an engineering degree from Stanford, “I fell in
love with the metrics of running—V O2max, cadence, heart
rate,” he says. “I have a demanding job and not a lot of time to
waste, so I need every step to count.”
Brandt had an inkling that he had natural running ability from
a sub-5:00 self-assigned mile time trial in college. For his first
marathon, at age 28, he targeted breaking 3:00 at the 2017
San Francisco Marathon. Online research led him to the
second edition of Advanced Marathoning. He followed the 18-
week, 70-85 miles-per-week schedule and ran 2:55. (“I wanted
to qualify for Boston with a cushion,” Brandt says.) He has used
Advanced Marathoning schedules for his subsequent
marathons, including using the third edition to guide him toward
the 2:40 PR he ran at Chicago in 2023.
--- PAGE 294 ---
Despite now knowing more about running, Brandt still enjoys
following a schedule written by someone else. “I benefit from
not having to think about what to run each day,” he says. “I like
that the programs tell me what to do as well as what not to do.
Without a guide, I would just run my ass off and probably get
hurt. I’ve benefited from being told when to take it easy—
recovery days are a big key.”
Other keys to Brandt’s success include being devoted to
strength training and fastidious about nutrition. He does a lot of
single-leg exercises and mobility work to build resistance to
injury and to counteract the negative effects of sitting while
working. As for nutrition, Brandt, who trains first thing in the
morning, says, “As soon as the run is complete, the workday
starts. If I go immediately into meetings without refueling, I hit a
hard wall.” He makes a smoothie before his run to down after
his run and prepares meals a day ahead so that he has ready
access to high-quality calories throughout the day.
Brandt’s nonrunning life is full—he’s the CEO of the
performance-nutrition brand Ketone-IQ, a husband, and the
father of two young children. He generally targets one
marathon a year and goes all-in during his buildup. The rest of
the year, he runs 40-50 miles a week, with more trail running
and heavier lifting at the gym. He believes the variety keeps
him mentally and physically fresh. “At the end of a marathon
build, I feel like a Ferrari—built for speed, one motion over and
over,” he says. “In the offseason, I’m more like a Jeep—
stronger, but slower.” This approach also helps with Brandt’s
home life, as he takes on more childcare so that his wife has
adequate time for her passions.
“Running marathons has changed me for the better,” Brandt
says. “I’ve learned that no one day is super important. What I
do each day might be challenging, but it’s possible. Stacking up
day after day like that allows me to do something that seems
impossible. That has taught me a lot about life and being an
--- PAGE 295 ---
entrepreneur. No one day makes or breaks you. It’s that
dogged relentless day after day that makes you successful.”
AFTER THE MARATHON
The final schedule in this chapter is a 5-week recovery schedule for after
the marathon; it completes the training program and leaves you ready to
prepare for future challenges. This schedule is appropriate whether you
followed the 12- or 18-week marathon-prep schedule.
The recovery schedule is purposely conservative. You have little to gain
by rushing back into training, and your risk of injury is elevated at this
point, owing to the reduced resiliency of your muscles and connective
tissue after the marathon.
The schedule starts with 2 days off from running, which is the bare
minimum of time away from running you should allow yourself. If you still
have acute soreness or tightness so severe that it will alter your form, or if
you just don’t feel like running, take more than 2 days off. If ever there was
a time to lose your marathoner’s mindset, the week after your goal race is it.
Even most of the top runners in the world take days off after a marathon.
They know that the nearly negligible benefits of a short run at this time are
far outweighed by the risks. Not running now will also increase your
chances of being inspired to resume hard training when your body allows it.
Of course, some people don’t consider themselves real runners unless
they run pretty much every day of their lives. Plod through a few miles if
you must, but be aware that you’re likely prolonging your recovery.
What better aids recovery during this time is light cross-training, such as
swimming or cycling. These activities increase blood flow through your
muscles without subjecting them to pounding. Walking will also achieve
this in the week after the marathon.
One way to ensure that you don’t run too hard too soon after your
marathon is to use a heart rate monitor. As discussed in chapter 3, a heart
rate monitor can help prevent you from going too fast on recovery days.
During the first few weeks after the marathon, keep your heart rate below
75 percent of your maximal heart rate or 66 percent of your heart rate
--- PAGE 296 ---
reserve. Running at this intensity will help your body overcome the stress of
the marathon as quickly as possible.
During this 5-week recovery schedule, the number of days of running
per week increases from 3 to 6. At the end of the 5 weeks, you should be
fully recovered from the marathon and, with a little luck, injury free and
mentally fresh.
70 to 85 Miles per Week 18-Week Schedule
Training Block 1—Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
17 16 15 14 13
(Recovery)
12
Monday Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11
km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11
km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Tuesday LT
9-10
miles (14-
16 km)
with 20-
25
minutes
at LT
pace
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
7-9 miles
(11-14 km)
with 6 × 12
sec hill
sprints + 8
× 100 m
strides
Gen-
aerobic
9-10
miles (14-
16 km)
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles
(14-16
km) with 8
× 12 sec
hill sprints
+ 8 × 100
m strides
LT
9-11 miles
(14-18 km)
with 30-35
minutes at
LT pace
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
with 10 ×
100 m
strides
WednesdayMed-long
run
11-12
miles (18-
19 km)
Med-long
run
12-13
miles (19-
21 km)
Med-long
run
13-14
miles (21-
23 km)
Med-long
run
13-15
miles (21-
24 km)
Med-long
run
14-15
miles (23-
24 km)
Med-long
run
12-13 miles
(19-21 km)
Thursday Recovery
5-7 miles
(8-11 km)
Recovery
5-7 miles
(8-11 km)
Recovery
5-7 miles
(8-11 km)
Recovery
5-7 miles
(8-11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Friday Gen-
aerobic
9-10
miles (14-
Gen-
aerobic
10-11
miles (16-
LT
9-11
miles (14-
18 km)
Gen-
aerobic
10-11
miles (16-
Gen-
aerobic
10-11
miles (16-
Gen-
aerobic
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
--- PAGE 297 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
17 16 15 14 13
(Recovery)
12
16 km) 18 km) with 25-
30
minutes
at LT
pace
18 km) 18 km)
Saturday Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Sunday Long run
16-17
miles (26-
27 km)
Marathon-
pace run
16-17
miles (26-
27 km)
with 8
miles (13
km) at
marathon
pace
Long run
17-18
miles (27-
29 km)
Long run
19-20
miles (31-
32 km)
Marathon-
pace run
17-18
miles (27-
29 km)
with 10
miles (16
km) at
marathon
pace
Long run
15-16 miles
(24-26 km)
Weekly
volume
60-68
miles (97-
109 km)
61-70
miles (98-
113 km)
64-73
miles
(103-117
km)
67-76
miles
(108-122
km)
68-76
miles (109-
122 km)
58-65 miles
(93-105
km)
Training Block 2—LT + Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 8 (Recovery)7
Monday Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 4 miles
(6 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 4 miles
(6 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Recovery
AM 6-7
miles (10-
11 km)
PM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
Tuesday LT
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
Gen-
aerobic
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-
14 km)
Gen-
aerobic
--- PAGE 298 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 8 (Recovery)7
with 30-35
minutes at
LT pace
8-10 miles
(13-16 km)
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
WednesdayMed-long
run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Med-long
run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 7 ×
600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Med-long
run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Thursday Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Friday Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
LT
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
with 35-40
minutes at
LT pace
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
Med-long run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
LT
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
with 35-45
minutes at
LT pace
Saturday Gen-aerobic
+ speed
7-8 miles
(11-13 km)
with 6 × 12
sec hill
sprints + 10
× 100 m
strides
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
with 6 × 100
m strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
7-8 miles (11-
13 km) with 8 ×
12 sec hill
sprints +
8 × 100 m
strides
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Sunday Long run
19-21 miles
(31-34 km)
Long run
20-22 miles
(32-35 km)
Marathon-
pace run
17-18 miles
(27-29 km)
with 12 miles
(19 km) at
marathon
pace
Long run
15-16 miles
(24-26 km)
Long run
22-24 miles
(35-39 km)
Weekly
volume
75-83 miles
(121-134
km)
74-83 miles
(119-134
km)
71-79 miles
(114-127 km)
61-68 miles
(98-109 km)
77-86 miles
(124-138
km)
--- PAGE 299 ---
Training Block 3—Race Preparation
WEEKS TO GOAL
6 5 4 3
Monday Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
PM 4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Recovery
AM 6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
PM 4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
PM 4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
PM 4 miles (6
km)
Tuesday Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-
16 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-
16 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-14
km)
Wednesday1O2max
9-10 miles (14-
16 km) with 5 ×
600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
V O2max
11-12 miles (18-
19 km) with 6 × 1
km at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
V O2max
9-10 miles (14-
16 km) with 5 ×
600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
V O2max
11-12 miles (18-
19 km) with 6 ×
1 km at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Thursday Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
Recovery
AM 6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
PM 4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
Med-long run
AM 14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Recovery
PM 4 miles (6
km)
Friday Recovery +
speed 5-6 miles
(8-10 km) with 6
× 100 m strides
Med-long run
11-12 miles (18-
19 km)
Recovery +
speed
5-6 miles (8-10
km) with 6 × 100
m strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
7-9 miles (11-14
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
Saturday 8K-15K tune-up
race (total 10-15
miles [16-24
km])
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
8K-15K tune-up
race (total 10-15
miles [16-24
km])
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km)
Marathon-pace
run
20-21 miles (32-
34 km) with 14
miles (23 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km)
Long run
20-22 miles (32-
35 km)
--- PAGE 300 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
6 5 4 3
Weekly
volume
64-76 miles
(103-122 km)
77-86 miles (124-
138 km)
64-76 miles
(103-122 km)
78-87 miles
(126-140 km)
Training Block 4—Taper and Race
WEEKS TO GOAL
2 1 Race week
Monday Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Rest or cross-train
Tuesday Gen-aerobic + speed
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
with 6 × 10 sec hill
sprints + 12 x 100m
strides
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with
8 × 100 m strides
Gen-aerobic
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
WednesdayGen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Dress rehearsal
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 2 miles (3 km)
at marathon pace
Thursday Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 6 × 100 m strides
V O2max
8-10 miles (13-16 km)
with 5 × 1 km at 5K race
pace; jog 50%-90%
interval time
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery + speed
4-6 miles (6-10 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Saturday 8K-10K tune-up race
(total 10-12 miles [16-
19 km])
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with
8 × 100 m strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27 km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21 km)
Goal marathon
Weekly
volume
61-69 miles (98-111
km)
47-55 miles (76-89 km)25-32 miles (40-51
km)
(6 days prerace)
--- PAGE 301 ---
70 to 85 Miles per Week 12-Week Schedule
Training Block 1—Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 8
Monday Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 8 × 12
sec hill sprints + 8
× 100 m strides
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 4 miles (6
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
PM 4 miles (6 km)
Recovery
AM 6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
PM 4 miles (6
km)
Tuesday Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
Med-long run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 8 × 12
sec hill sprints + 8
× 100 m strides
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
WednesdayMed-long run
12-13 miles (19-
21 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-
16 km)
Med-long run
13-14 miles (21-
23 km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Thursday Recovery
5-7 miles (8-11
km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Friday Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
LT
9-10 miles (14-
16 km) with 20-
25 minutes at
LT pace
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles (16-
18 km)
LT
10-11 miles
(16-18 km) with
25-30 minutes
at LT pace
Saturday Recovery
5-7 miles (8-11
km)
Recovery
5-7 miles (8-11
km)
Recovery
5-7 miles (8-11
km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Sunday Marathon-pace
run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km) with 8
miles (13 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
17-18 miles
(27-29 km)
Marathon-pace
run
17-18 miles (27-
29 km) with 10
miles (16 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
17-19 miles
(27-31 km)
--- PAGE 302 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 8
Weekly
volume
61-70 miles (98-
113 km)
66-74 miles
(106-119 km)
68-76 miles (109-
122 km)
73-81 miles
(117-130 km)
Training Block 2—LT + Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
(Recovery) 7 6 5
Monday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 6-7 miles (10-11 km)
PM 4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
PM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Tuesday Gen-aerobic + speed
8-9 miles (13-14 km)
with 10 × 100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 10 × 100 m
strides
WednesdayMed-long run
12-13 miles (19-21
km)
V O2max
11-12 miles (18-19 km) with
6 × 1 km at 5K race pace;
jog 50%-90% interval time
Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-24
km)
Thursday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-24 km)
Recovery
AM 6-7 miles (10-11
km)
PM 4 miles (6 km)
Friday LT
9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 25-30
minutes at LT pace
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
LT
11-12 miles (18-19
km) with 30-40
minutes at LT pace
Saturday Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with 6
× 100 m strides
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 6 × 100 m
strides
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27
km)
Marathon-pace run
18-19 miles (29-31 km) with
12 miles (19 km) at
Long run
20-22 miles (32-35
km)
--- PAGE 303 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
(Recovery) 7 6 5
marathon pace
Weekly
volume
61-68 miles (98-109
km)
77-85 miles (124-137 km)79-88 miles (127-
142 km)
Training Block 3—Race Preparation
WEEKS TO GOAL
4 3 2
Monday Recovery
AM 6-7 miles (10-11
km)
PM 4 miles (6 km)
Recovery
AM 6-7 miles (10-11
km)
PM 4 miles (6 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Tuesday Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic + speed
9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 6 × 10 sec
hill sprints + 12 x
100m strides
Wednesday1O2max
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
with 5 × 600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90% interval time
V O2max
11-12 miles (18-19 km)
with 6 × 1 km at 5K race
pace; jog 50%-90%
interval time
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
Thursday Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with
6 × 100 m strides
Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-24 km)
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Saturday 8K-15K tune-up race
(total 10-15 miles [16-24
km])
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 6 ×100 m strides
8K-10K tune-up race
(total 10-12 miles
[16-19 km])
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27 km)
Long run
19-21 miles (31-34 km)
Long run
16-17 miles (26-27
km)
--- PAGE 304 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
4 3 2
Weekly
volume
65-76 miles (105-122
km)
78-86 miles (126-138
km)
61-69 miles (98-111
km)
Training Block 4—Taper and Race
WEEKS TO GOAL
1 Race week
Monday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Rest or cross-train
Tuesday Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with 8 × 100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
WednesdayRecovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Dress rehearsal
7-8 miles (11-13 km) with 2
miles (3 km) at marathon pace
Thursday V O2max
8-10 miles (13-16 km) with 5 × 1 km at
5K race pace; jog 50%-90% interval
time
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery + speed
4-6 miles (6-10 km) with 6 ×
100 m strides
Saturday Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km) with 10 × 100 m
strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21 km)
Goal marathon
Weekly
volume
47-55 miles (76-89 km) 25-32 miles (40-51 km) (6
days prerace)
70 to 85 Miles per Week
--- PAGE 305 ---
Training Block 5—Postmarathon Recovery
WEEKS AFTER THE MARATHON
1 2 3 4 5
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Tuesday Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
WednesdayRecovery
3-4 miles
(5-6 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Thursday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Friday Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 8
× 100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 8
× 100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
with 8 × 100
m strides
Saturday Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Sunday Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Gen-
aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Med-long run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles
(19-21 km)
Weekly
volume
13-16
miles (21-
26 km)
28-33
miles (45-
53 km)
34-39 miles
(55-63 km)
39-44 miles
(63-71 km)
46-52 miles
(74-84 km)
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 306 ---
12
MARATHON TRAINING ON
MORE THAN 85 MILES (137 KM)
PER WEEK
Description
--- PAGE 307 ---
T
his chapter is for true high-volume marathoners who can devote their
full energy to training. It includes an 18-week and a 12-week
schedule. Both schedules increase weekly mileage progressively from
about 80 miles (129 km) to a peak of at least 100 miles (161 km). We say
“about 80 miles” and “at least 100 miles” because we provide a mileage
range for each day of training so you can run a bit more or a bit less
depending on how you’re feeling that day.
As discussed in chapter 1, it’s useful to divide your overall training
schedule into training blocks of several weeks each. The training schedules
consist of four blocks, which focus on endurance, lactate threshold (LT) and
endurance, race preparation, and tapering, respectively. A final schedule,
which contains a 5-week post marathon recovery program, can follow either
of the training schedules.
Of the two training schedules presented in this chapter, we recommend
the 18-week schedule for most situations. Eighteen weeks is plenty of time
to stimulate the necessary adaptations to improve your marathon
performance. At the same time, 18 weeks is short enough that you can focus
your efforts without becoming bored with the process.
At times, however, you simply don’t have 18 weeks to prepare for your
marathon. The 12-week schedule includes the same training blocks as the
18-week schedules, but because of the short time for preparation, each
block is abbreviated. If you go into a marathon in a rush, you must realize
that your preparation won’t be as thorough as if you had longer to prepare.
The 12-week schedule takes into account that sometimes circumstances
don’t allow you the optimal length of time for preparation and strives to
provide a compact yet effective training program.
BEFORE STARTING THE SCHEDULES
These schedules are challenging right from the start and get harder as your
marathon approaches. So that you can progress as the training increases in
quantity and quality and to minimize your chances of injury, you should be
able to complete the first week of the schedule without too much effort.
Be realistic in assessing whether you’re ready for the first week of the
schedule. For example, if you’ve been running 60 miles (97 km) per week
--- PAGE 308 ---
and your longest run in the last several weeks was 12 miles (19 km), now
isn’t the time to suddenly jump to a 76- to 85-mile (122-137 km) week
containing a 17- to 18-mile (27-29 km) run, as the first week of the 12-week
schedule calls for. The idea behind the schedules isn’t to make you as tired
as possible as soon as possible but to apply repeated training stress that you
absorb and from which you benefit.
As a rule, you should be running at least 70 to 75 miles (113-121 km) a
week before starting these schedules, and in the last month, you should
have comfortably completed a run of at least 15 miles (24 km).
READING THE SCHEDULES
The schedules are presented in a day-by-day format. The main limitation
with this approach is that it’s impossible to guess the myriad of outside
factors that may influence your day-to-day nonrunning life (assuming you
still have one at this level of volume). Work schedules, family life,
relationships, school commitments, and Mother Nature all play a part in
determining when you get to do your long runs and other aspects of
marathon preparation. You’ll no doubt require some flexibility in your
training and will need to juggle days around from time to time. That’s
expected, and as long as you don’t try to make up for lost time by doing
several hard days in a row, you should be able to avoid injury and
overtraining. By following the principles covered in the earlier chapters,
you will be able to safely fine-tune the training schedules to suit your
circumstances.
The schedules express each day’s training in miles and kilometers; use
whichever you’re accustomed to. The mile and kilometer ranges for each
day (and the weekly total) are rough equivalents of each other, not a direct
conversion from one to the other.
FOLLOWING THE SCHEDULES
Each column of the schedules represents a week’s training. For example, in
the 12-week schedule, the column for 11 weeks to goal indicates that at the
--- PAGE 309 ---
end of that week you have 11 weeks until your marathon. The schedules
continue week by week until race week.
We’ve included a specific workout for each day as well as a category of
training for that day. For example, in the 18-week schedule, on the Monday
of the 5-weeks-to-go column, the specific workouts are two 5- to 6-mile (8-
10 km) runs and the category of training for that day is recovery. This
aspect of the schedules allows you to quickly see the balance of training
during each week and the progression of workouts from week to week.
Look again at the 18-week schedule—it’s easy to see that with 5 weeks to
go until the marathon, there are two recovery days that week with an LT
session, two general aerobic and speed sessions, a medium-long run and a
long run. Looking at the row for Sunday, it’s easy to see how the long runs
progress and then taper in the last few weeks before the marathon.
The workouts are divided into the following eight categories: long runs,
medium-long runs, marathon-pace runs, general aerobic runs, LT runs,
V O2max intervals, recovery runs, and speed training. Each of these
categories is explained in depth in chapter 8, and the physiology behind the
training is explained in chapter 1.
DOING DOUBLES
As discussed in chapter 8, sometimes marathoners benefit from running
twice a day. This is obviously the case for anyone cranking out 100-mile
(161 km) weeks. In these schedules, for example, recovery days of 10 to 12
miles (16-19 km) are often broken into two short runs. Rather than making
you more tired, splitting your volume like this on easy days will speed your
recovery because each run will increase blood flow to your muscles yet take
so little out of you.
As we mention at the beginning of this chapter, we know that not
everyone will be able to follow these schedules exactly as they appear. That
applies on the days that call for a recovery run in the morning and an LT
workout in the evening. If your schedule makes it more likely that you’ll do
a high-quality tempo run in the morning rather than the evening, simply flip
the workouts prescribed for these days.
--- PAGE 310 ---
WHEN 105 MILES (169 KM) PER
WEEK JUST ISN’T ENOUGH
The hardy few among you might want to do more volume than what’s
prescribed in the schedules. If you’re in this group, be sure to follow the
spirit of the schedules when adding miles—that is, your volume should
build gradually during training block 1, peak at the end of training block 2,
come down slightly during training block 3, and fall dramatically during
training block 4.
Where should you add miles to the schedules? Try adding a bit of
volume to the general aerobic runs and medium-long runs if you sense that
doing so doesn’t detract from your week’s most important sessions.
(Remember, volume is a means to a goal, not a primary goal in itself. At
your volume level, the risk of injury increases rapidly if additional distance
is added haphazardly.) You could also add miles to your warm-ups and
cool-downs on V O2max and LT workout days. If you’re going to do more
doubles than the schedules stipulate, refer to the section on two-a-day runs
in chapter 8.
RACING STRATEGIES
We discussed marathon race strategy at length in chapter 7. If you follow
one of the schedules in this chapter, you will be more thoroughly prepared
for your marathon than most of the other runners in the race. Few others in
the field will have done the combination of volume and targeted quality that
you have.
Despite your commitment and eagerness, though, you’ll need to not get
carried away in the early miles, even if your goal pace in the first half feels
quite easy. The temptation to try to capitalize on that good feeling will be
strong. Perhaps more than any other readers of this book, you will need to
be disciplined in the early miles to stick to your goal pace so that you can
use your fitness in the second half of the race and run even splits. Although
your outstanding preparation makes you less likely than most to overextend
--- PAGE 311 ---
yourself late in the race from a too-hasty start, there’s still no point in
squandering months of hard work with an overly ambitious early pace.
At the same time, it’s likely that among readers of this book you’ll be
attempting to race the marathon at the greatest differential from your
normal training pace. For that reason, in the days before your marathon,
your goal pace might seem especially daunting. Draw confidence from your
long runs, tempo runs, and marathon-pace runs that you can sustain your
ambitious goal pace for 26.2 miles (42.2 km). Also, focus on your goal-pace
splits to increase your chances of running the first half of the race
intelligently and thereby vastly increasing your chances of being able to
hold goal pace past 20 miles (32 km) all the way to the finish line.
AFTER THE MARATHON
The final schedule in this chapter is a 5-week recovery schedule for after
the marathon; it completes the training program and leaves you ready to
prepare for future challenges. This schedule is appropriate whether you
followed the 12- or 18-week marathon-prep schedule.
The recovery schedule is purposely conservative. You have little to gain
by rushing back into training, and your risk of injury is elevated at this
point, owing to the reduced resiliency of your muscles and connective
tissue after the marathon.
The schedule starts with 2 days off from running, which is the bare
minimum of time away from running you should allow yourself. If you still
have acute soreness or tightness so severe that it will alter your form, or if
you just don’t feel like running, take more than 2 days off. If ever there was
a time to lose your marathoner’s mindset, the week after your goal race is it.
Even most of the top runners in the world take days off after a marathon.
They know that the nearly negligible benefits of a short run at this time are
far outweighed by the risks. Not running now will also increase your
chances of being inspired to resume hard training when your body allows it.
Of course, some people don’t consider themselves real runners unless
they run pretty much every day of their lives. Plod through a few miles if
you must, but be aware that you’re likely prolonging your recovery.
--- PAGE 312 ---
What better aids recovery during this time is light cross-training, such as
swimming or cycling. These activities increase blood flow through your
muscles without subjecting them to pounding. Walking will also achieve
this in the week after the marathon.
One way to ensure that you don’t run too hard too soon after your
marathon is to use a heart rate monitor. As discussed in chapter 3, a heart
rate monitor can help prevent you from going too fast on recovery days.
During the first few weeks after the marathon, keep your heart rate below
75 percent of your maximal heart rate or 66 percent of your heart rate
reserve. Running at this intensity will help your body overcome the stress of
the marathon as quickly as possible.
During this 5-week recovery schedule, the number of days of running
per week increases from 3 to 6. At the end of the 5 weeks, you should be
fully recovered from the marathon and, with a little luck, injury free and
mentally fresh.
More Than 85 Miles per Week 18-Week Schedule
Training Block 1—Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
17 16 15 14 13
(Recovery)
12
Monday Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-
10 km)
PM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-
10 km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-
10 km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
Tuesday Recovery
AM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
LT
PM 9-10
miles (14-
16 km)
with 20-25
Recovery
AM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
PM 9-10
miles (14-
Gen-
aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16
km)
Recovery
AM 4-5
miles (6-
8 km)
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
PM 10-11
miles
Recovery
AM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
LT
PM 10-11
miles (16-
18 km)
with 30-35
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
with 10 ×
100 m
strides
--- PAGE 313 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
17 16 15 14 13
(Recovery)
12
minutes at
LT pace
16 km)
with 8 × 12
sec hill
sprints +8
× 100 m
strides
(16-18
km) with
8 × 12
sec hill
sprints
+ 8 × 100
m strides
minutes at
LT pace
WednesdayMed-long
run
12-13
miles (19-
21 km)
Med-long
run
13-14
miles (21-
23 km)
Recovery
AM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
LT
PM 10-11
miles (16-
18 km)
with 25-30
minutes at
LT pace
Med-long
run
14-15
miles
(23-24
km)
Med-long
run
14-15
miles (23-
24 km)
Med-long
run
12-13 miles
(19-21 km)
Thursday Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-
10 km)
PM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-
10 km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-
10 km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
Friday Gen-
aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles
(14-16
km) with
10 × 100
m strides
Med-long
run
11-12
miles (18-
19 km)
Med-long
run
13-14
miles (21-
23 km)
Med-long
run
12-13
miles
(19-21
km)
Gen-
aerobic
10-11
miles (16-
18 km)
Gen-
aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Saturday Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11
km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Recovery
7-8 miles
(11-13
km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11
km)
Recovery
7-8 miles
(11-13 km)
Recovery
7-8 miles
(11-13 km)
Sunday Long run Marathon-
pace run
Long run Long runMarathon-
pace run
Long run
--- PAGE 314 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
17 16 15 14 13
(Recovery)
12
16-18
miles (26-
29 km)
17-18
miles (27-
29 km)
with 8
miles (13
km) at
marathon
pace
18-19
miles (29-
31 km)
20-21
miles
(32-34
km)
18-19
miles (29-
31 km)
with 10
miles (16
km) at
marathon
pace
15-16 miles
(24-26 km)
Weekly
volume
74-85
miles
(119-137
km)
78-88
miles (126-
142 km)
81-91
miles
(130-146
km)
86-96
miles
(138-154
km)
83-93
miles (134-
150 km)
71-80 miles
(114-129
km)
Training Block 2—LT + Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 (Recovery) 87
Monday Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Tuesday Recovery
AM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
LT
PM 10-11
miles (16-18
km) with
30-35
minutes at
LT pace
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
Gen-
aerobic +
speed
PM 9-10
miles (14-
16 km) with
10 × 100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles (14-
16 km) with 10
× 100 m strides
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic
+ speed
PM 9-10
miles (14-16
km) with 6 ×
10 sec hill
sprints + 10
× 100 m
strides
WednesdayRecovery Med-long
run
Recovery V O2max Med-long
run
--- PAGE 315 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 (Recovery) 87
AM 4-5
miles (6-8
km)
Med-long
run
PM 14-15
miles (23-24
km)
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Med-long run
PM 14-15
miles (23-24
km)
10-11 miles
(16-18 km) with
7 × 600 m at
5K race pace;
jog 50%-90%
interval time
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Thursday Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Friday Med-long
run
12-13 miles
(19-21 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6
miles (8-10
km)
LT
PM 11-12
miles (18-
19 km) with
35-40
minutes at
LT pace
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Med-long run
PM 13-14
miles (21-23
km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles
(19-21 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
LT
PM 11-12
miles (18-19
km) with 35-
45 minutes
at LT pace
Saturday Gen-aerobic
+ speed
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
with 8 × 12
sec hill
sprints + 8 ×
100 m
strides
Gen-
aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic
+ speed
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
with 10 ×
100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Sunday Long run
19-21 miles
(31-34 km)
Long run
21-22 miles
(34-35 km)
Marathon-
pace run
19-20 miles
(31-32 km)
with 12 miles
(19 km) at
Long run
15-16 miles
(24-26 km)
Long run
22-24 miles
(35-39 km)
--- PAGE 316 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 (Recovery) 87
marathon
pace
Weekly
volume
92-104
miles (148-
167 km)
94-105
miles (151-
169 km)
95-106 miles
(153-171
km)
76-85 miles
(122-137 km)
95-107 miles
(153-172
km)
Training Block 3—Race Preparation
WEEKS TO GOAL
6 5 4 3
Monday Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Tuesday Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
V O2max
PM 9-10 miles
(14-16 km) with 6
× 600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90% interval
time
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
PM 10-11
miles (16-18
km) with 8 ×
100 m strides
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Gen-aerobic
PM 10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
WednesdayRecovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Med-long run
PM 13-15 miles
(21-24 km)
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Med-long run
PM 14-15
miles (23-24
km)
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
V O2max
PM 9-10 miles
(14-16 km) with 6
× 600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90% interval
time
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
V O2max
PM 10-11 miles
(16-18 km) with 6
× 1,200 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90% interval
time
Thursday Recovery +
speed
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery +
speed
Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-
24 km)
--- PAGE 317 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
6 5 4 3
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
PM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
LT
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
with 30-40
minutes at LT
pace
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Gen-aerobic
PM 9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Saturday 15K to half
marathon tune-up
race (total 14-18
miles [23-29 km])
Gen-aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
with 8 × 100
m strides
8K-15K tune-up
race (total 10-15
miles [16-24 km])
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery + speed
PM 7-8 miles (11-
13 km) with 8 ×
100 m strides
Sunday Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-14
km)
Long run
21-22 miles
(34-35 km)
Long run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km)
Long run
20-22 miles (32-
35 km)
Weekly
volume
73-87 miles (117-
140 km)
94-105 miles
(151-169 km)
74-88 miles (119-
142 km)
91-103 miles
(146-166 km)
Training Block 4—Taper and Race
WEEKS TO GOAL
2 1 Race week
Monday Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Tuesday Gen-aerobic + speed
10-11 miles (16-18 km)
with 6 × 10 sec hill
sprints + 12 × 100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic + speed
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
with 10 × 100 m strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
WednesdayRecovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Gen-aerobic
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
PM 4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Dress rehearsal
8-9 miles (13-14 km)
with 2.5 miles (4 km)
--- PAGE 318 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
2 1 Race week
PM 9-10 miles (14-16
km)
at marathon pace
Thursday Recovery + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 8 × 100 m strides
V O2max
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
with 5 × 1 km at 5K race
pace; jog 50%-90%
interval time
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Saturday 8K-10K tune-up race
(total 10-12 miles [16-
19 km])
Gen-aerobic + speed
8-9 miles (13-14 km) with
8 × 100 m strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27 km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21 km)
Goal marathon
Weekly
volume
71-81 miles (114-130
km)
58-66 miles (93-106 km)31-38 miles (50-61
km)
(6 days prerace)
More Than 85 Miles per Week 12-Week Schedule
Training Block 1—Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 8
Monday Gen-aerobic +
speed
10-11 miles (16-
18 km) with 8 × 12
sec hill sprints + 8
× 100 m strides
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Tuesday Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Gen-aerobic
--- PAGE 319 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
11 10 9 8
PM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
PM 10-11 miles
(16-18 km) with
8 × 12 sec hill
sprints +
8 × 100 m
strides
PM 10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
WednesdayMed-long run
13-14 miles (21-
23 km)
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
LT
PM 9-10 miles
(14-16 km) with
20-25 minutes
at LT pace
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
LT
PM 10-11 miles
(16-18 km) with
25-30 minutes at
LT pace
Thursday Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
PM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
PM 4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Med-long run
13-14 miles (21-
23 km)
Friday Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles (16-
18 km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Saturday Recovery + speed
7-8 miles (11-13
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 8 ×
100 m strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 8 ×
100 m strides
Recovery +
speed
7-8 miles (11-13
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
Sunday Marathon-pace
run
17-18 miles (27-
29 km) with 8
miles (13 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
18-19 miles
(29-31 km)
Long run
19-21 miles
(31-34 km)
Marathon-pace
run
18-19 miles (29-
31 km) with 10
miles (16 km) at
marathon pace
Weekly
volume
76-85 miles (122-
137 km)
82-92 miles
(132-148 km)
84-95 miles
(135-153 km)
87-98 miles (140-
158 km)
--- PAGE 320 ---
Training Block 2—LT + Endurance
WEEKS TO GOAL
(Recovery) 7 6 5
Monday Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Tuesday Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Gen-aerobic + speed
PM 9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 10 × 100 m
strides
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic
PM 9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
PM 10-11 miles (16-
18 km) with 8 × 100
m strides
WednesdayMed-long run
11-12 miles (18-19
km)
V O2max
10-11 miles (16-18 km) with
6 × 1,200 m at 5K race
pace; jog 50%-90% interval
time
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Med-long run
PM 14-15 miles (23-
24 km)
Thursday Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Med-long run
PM 14-15 miles (23-24 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Friday LT
9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 25-30
minutes at LT pace
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic
PM 9-10 miles (14-16 km)
LT
11-12 miles (18-19
km) with 30-40
minutes at LT pace
Saturday Recovery + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 8 × 100 m
strides
Recovery + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km) with 8
× 100 m strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 8 × 100 m
strides
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27
km)
Marathon-pace run
19-20 miles (31-32 km) with
12 miles (19 km) at
marathon pace
Long run
21-22 miles (34-35
km)
--- PAGE 321 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
(Recovery) 7 6 5
Weekly
volume
73-82 miles (117-132
km)
93-104 miles (150-167 km)94-105 miles (151-
169 km)
Training Block 3—Race Preparation
WEEKS TO GOAL
4 3 2
Monday Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
PM 5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Tuesday Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic + speed
10-11 miles (16-18
km) with 6 × 10 sec
hill sprints + 12 ×
100 m strides
WednesdayRecovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8 km)
V O2max
PM 9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 6 × 600 m at
5K race pace; jog
50%-90% interval time
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8 km)
1O2max
PM 10-11 miles (16-18
km) with 6 × 1,200 m at
5K race pace; jog
50%-90% interval time
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Gen-aerobic
PM 9-10 miles (14-
16 km)
Thursday Recovery + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 8 × 100 m strides
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Med-long run
PM 14-15 miles (23-24
km)
Recovery + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 8 × 100 m
strides
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery
AM 4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Gen-aerobic
PM 9-10 miles (14-16
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Saturday 8K-15K tune-up race
(total 10-15 miles [16-24
km])
Recovery + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 8 × 100 m strides
8K-10K tune-up race
(total 10-12 miles
[16-19 km])
--- PAGE 322 ---
WEEKS TO GOAL
4 3 2
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27 km)
Long run
20-22 miles (32-35 km)
Long run
16-17 miles (26-27
km)
Weekly
volume
70-83 miles (113-134
km)
91-103 miles (146-166
km)
71-81 miles (114-130
km)
Training Block 4—Taper and Race
WEEKS TO GOAL
1 Race week
Monday Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
Tuesday Gen-aerobic + speed
9-10 miles (14-16 km) with 10 × 100 m
strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
WednesdayRecovery
AM 5-6 miles (8-10 km)
PM 4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Dress rehearsal
8-9 miles (13-14 km) with 2.5
miles (4 km) at marathon pace
Thursday V O2max
9-10 miles (14-16 km) with 5 × 1 km at
5K race pace; jog 50%-90% interval
time
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km) with 6
×100 m strides
Saturday Gen-aerobic + speed
8-9 miles (13-14 km) with 8 × 100 m
strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21 km)
Goal marathon
Weekly
volume
58-66 miles (93-106 km) 31-38 miles (50-61 km) (6 days
prerace)
--- PAGE 323 ---
More Than 85 Miles per Week
Training Block 5—Postmarathon Recovery
WEEKS AFTER THE MARATHON
1 2 3 4 5
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Tuesday Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-
14 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-
14 km)
WednesdayRecovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles (14-
16 km) with
10 × 100 m
strides
Thursday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Gen-aerobic
+ speed
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 8
× 100 m
strides
Gen-aerobic
+ speed
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 8
× 100 m
strides
LT
9-10 miles (14-
16 km) with 20-
25 minutes at
LT pace
Saturday Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Sunday Recovery
7-8 miles
(11-13 km)
Gen-
aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Med-long run
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
Med-long run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
Med-long run
13-14 miles
(21-23 km)
Weekly
volume
16-19
miles (26-
31 km)
30-35
miles (48-
56 km)
35-40 miles
(56-64 km)
42-47 miles
(68-76 km)
50-56 miles
(80-90 km)
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 324 ---
T
13
MULTIPLE MARATHONING
his chapter is for those occasions when, for whatever reason, you’ve
decided to do two marathons with 12 weeks or less in between.
Though doing two (or more) marathons in rapid succession generally
isn’t the best way to go after a personal best time, this chapter focuses on
structuring your training to maximize your likelihood of success. It includes
five schedules covering 12, 10, 8, 6, and 4 weeks between marathons.
--- PAGE 325 ---
These schedules are substantially different from the schedules in
chapters 9 through 12; the schedules in this chapter must start with helping
you recover from marathon number 1 and then helping you train and taper
for marathon number 2. The number of weeks between marathons dictates
how much time you devote to recovery, training, and tapering. For example,
the 12-week schedule allows a relatively luxurious 4 weeks for recovery,
whereas the 6-week schedule allocates only 2 weeks to recovery.
The schedules in this chapter are written for marathoners who typically
build to 60 to 70 miles (97-113 km) per week during marathon preparation.
The 10- and 12-week schedules build to a peak weekly mileage of 63 to 69
miles (101-111 km), whereas the 8-, 6-, and 4-week schedules peak at 61 to
67 miles (98-108 km), 52 to 58 miles (84-93 km), and 42 to 48 miles (68-77
km), respectively. If your mileage during marathon preparation is typically
more than 70 miles (113 km) per week, scale up the volume in these
schedules moderately. Similarly, if your mileage typically peaks at less than
60 miles (97 km) per week, scale the training back proportionately.
The schedules assume that you want to do your best in your second
marathon. Though this might not mean running a personal best or even
running as fast as you did in the first race in your double (or triple, or
whatever), it does mean toeing the line with the intention of running as fast
as you can that day. If your multiple-marathoning goal is to cruise
comfortably through a second or third marathon soon after a peak effort,
ignore these schedules. Simply focus on recovering from your first race
while interspersing enough long runs to maintain your endurance until your
next one.
CJ Albertson
Fastest marathon: 2:08:17 (Chicago, 2024)
Marathon highlights: first in the 2023 California International
Marathon and the Baja California Marathon; top American in
the 2024 Boston Marathon; world record in the 50K
Some runners finish a marathon and swear, “Never again.” CJ
Albertson is more likely to ask, “What’s next?”
--- PAGE 326 ---
Description
It’s fair to say that Albertson runs more marathons than most
of his competitors. On consecutive weekends in December
2023, he won the California International Marathon (2:11:09)
and the Baja California Marathon (2:11:08). Two months after
that double, he placed fifth at the U.S. Olympic Marathon Trials
(in a personal best of 2:10:07) and was just 10 seconds shy of
making the Olympic team. Two months after the Trials, he
lowered his PR to 2:09:53 while placing seventh overall and
first American at Boston.
But it’s not necessarily fair to say that Albertson’s racing
schedule lacks focus. “Overall, I don’t run a ton of marathons or
particularly race a lot,” he says. “Sometimes I just stack a few
marathons close together.” As Albertson notes, in most other
events, runners have a season of more frequent racing.
“Training for four to five months to only run one big race isn’t
particularly fun,” he says. “It also sets you up for failure if that
one race doesn’t go great.”
This is a great example of knowing your psyche and then
training and racing accordingly. If you thrive on one or two
races being the focus of your year, great. If, like Albertson, you
don’t find that motivating, there’s nothing wrong with exploring
other approaches.
Of course, you can’t race two or more marathons in a short
time if you don’t adequately recover from the first. Albertson
--- PAGE 327 ---
says he’s not necessarily an outlier in being able to recover
quickly. “Many other athletes simply don’t try to race marathons
close together,” he points out, “so we don’t know if I recover
faster or not.”
It’s undeniable that there’s great variance in how beat-up
even elite runners are after a marathon. Although four-time
Olympian Meb Keflezighi occasionally ran two marathons in a
three-month span, he usually couldn’t walk normally in the
week after a marathon, and never attempted two high-level
marathons in one month. Still, Keflezighi also thought that
some of his peers raced too infrequently. He knew that not
every marathon was going to go well, and believed that, within
reason, running more of them gave him more opportunities to
have a great day.
Albertson is slightly more muscular and stockier than the
majority of his peers. The same is true of 2018 Boston
champion Yuki Kawauchi, whose love of racing and ability to
recover quickly has led to him running the most sub-2:20
marathons in history. In general terms, Albertson says, “I almost
never get hurt. Overall, I’m a fairly durable person with decent
strength, and I’ve done my best to not have any glaring stride
deficiencies. My natural attributes, lifetime of training, long
training runs, fueling properly in races (100 grams of carbs per
hour), and experience in marathons make the marathon still
hard but also somewhat of a normal thing my body is used to.
It’s logical a first-time marathoner who has never run more than
22 miles would take longer to recover. However, I think many
seasoned marathoners could recover and get back to normal
training within four to seven days if they really wanted to.”
Albertson generally trains by feel. He assesses how his body
is doing in the week after a marathon and intuits when to
resume easy running and when to progress to more ambitious
training. Other than the basics—good sleep and good nutrition
—he doesn’t do anything to speed the recovery process.
An obvious question for multiple marathoners is whether
more frequent racing detracts from reaching their potential at
--- PAGE 328 ---
the distance. Albertson, whose frequent PRs bolster his case,
believes the answer for him is “no.” He says, “The marathon
seems to be the only event where consistency is somewhat
frowned upon. The fact that I’ve run so many 2:10s and 2:11s
means I should be running 2:07 or 2:08 and that I just
underperform every race? Or maybe I’m just good at running a
solid marathon almost every time I’m out there, regardless of
the conditions, the course, how the race plays out, etc.”
Albertson has a message for would-be multiple marathoners.
“People tend to overthink the marathon,” he says. “They get
worried about having a great training block or having everything
planned leading up to it. It’s likely because they only race twice
a year, so they feel like they have to PR every time. But in the
1,500 [meters] and 5Ks, people have rust-buster races or just
randomly hop in a race. Not every race has to have perfect
training or be a PR; you just race to race. But very few have
that mentality in the marathon.”
READING THE SCHEDULES
The schedules are presented in a day-by-day format. The main limitation
with this approach is that it’s impossible to guess the myriad of outside
factors that may influence your day-to-day nonrunning life. Work
schedules, family life, relationships, school commitments, and Mother
Nature all play their part in determining when you get to do your long runs
and other aspects of marathon preparation. You’ll no doubt require some
flexibility in your training and will need to juggle days around from time to
time. That’s expected, and as long as you don’t try to make up for lost time
by doing several hard days in a row, you should be able to avoid injury and
overtraining.
The schedules express each day’s training in miles and kilometers; use
whichever you’re accustomed to. We provide a mileage range for each day
of training so you can run a bit more or a bit less depending on how you’re
feeling that day. The mile and kilometer figures for each day (and the
--- PAGE 329 ---
weekly total) are rough equivalents of each other, not a direct conversion
from one to the other.
Because of the large variation in the time required for marathon recovery
among individual runners, you should approach these schedules with a high
degree of flexibility. Also, if in your first marathon the weather was hot,
you became severely dehydrated, or you became unusually hobbled, your
recovery is likely to take longer than usual. When a conflict arises between
what the schedule says to do and what your body indicates it’s willing to do,
listen to your body. With these tight time frames between marathons, your
best strategy is first to focus on recovery and then to worry about the other
aspects of training. If you’re not able to follow the schedules closely for one
reason or another, follow the priorities discussed later in this chapter in
choosing which workouts to do and which to miss.
For all the schedules in this chapter, remember that in the first few weeks
after marathon number 1, recovery is your primary objective, and that
during the last 3 weeks, tapering to consolidate your energy reserves is
paramount. If you’re worn out or injured going into marathon number 2,
any extra workouts you’ve squeezed in won’t have been worth the effort.
PETE’S MULTIPLE MARATHONING
TRIFECTA
In 1983 I ran three high-quality marathons in 17 weeks. Nine
weeks after winning the San Francisco Marathon in 2:14:44, I
finished second in the Montreal Marathon in 2:12:33. Eight
weeks after that, I won the Auckland Marathon in 2:12:19. At the
time, the last two races were personal bests.
I did a few things wrong between San Francisco and Montreal
but was able to hold my body together through a combination of
luck, enthusiasm, and youth. (I was 26.) After San Francisco, I
was remarkably stiff for several days. I hobbled a 2-miler (3 km)
two days after the race and racked up 46 miles (74 km) for the
week. Two massages in each of the first two weeks helped bring
my legs around.
--- PAGE 330 ---
Fortunately, my body bounced back really well after that first
week, and I was up to 100 miles (161 km) in the third week after,
including a session of eight 800-meter repeats on the track. My
mileage climbed to 116 (187 km) and 122 (196 km) for the fourth
and fifth weeks, which was about as high as I used to get back
then. (I hadn’t made an Olympic team yet, so I was working full
time.) There was just enough time to fit in two tune-up races—a
5-miler (8 km) in 23:35 and a third-place finish in the New Haven
20K—and then it was time to taper again. Eight days before
Montreal, I went to the track and did two repeats of 1,600 meters
in 4:24 and 4:23, which was really fast for me and a good omen.
The last 2 weeks before the race I tried to catch up on sleep, and
I felt really ready going into Montreal.
The night after Montreal, I stayed out late, took an early flight
back to Boston, and caught a cab directly to work. This didn’t
help my recovery. After that, though, I settled down, and in the
first 3 weeks after Montreal, I covered 48, 72, and 97 miles (77,
116, and 156 km). Lots of sleep and weekly massages kept me
injury free, and, except for the occasional “Felt like hell” notation
in my diary, training went pretty well.
Three weeks before the Auckland Marathon, I started my leave
of absence from work at New Balance to prepare for the Olympic
Trials and flew to New Zealand with my training partner, Tom
Ratcliffe, who was also running Auckland. We got a bit carried
away with the excitement and probably overtrained the first week
there. The second week in New Zealand, I ran a 10K tune-up
race in 29:12, which was a good sign that I was ready for
another marathon. During the last week before the marathon,
however, I could tell that my body was on a fine edge, and I
decided to back right off. Three days before the race, I was still
feeling pretty tired. Fortunately, on race day, I felt strong and
broke away after 17 miles (27 km). The positive experience in
multiple marathoning was excellent practice for the following
year’s Olympic Trials and marathon.
—Pete Pfitzinger
--- PAGE 331 ---
One way to ensure that you don’t run too hard during the first few weeks
after your previous marathon is to use a heart rate monitor. As discussed in
chapters 1 and 3, a heart rate monitor can help prevent you from going too
fast on your easy days. During the first few weeks after the marathon, keep
your heart rate below 75 percent of your maximal heart rate or 66 percent of
your heart rate reserve to help speed your recovery.
FOLLOWING THE SCHEDULES
Each column of the schedules represents a week’s training. For example, in
the 10-week schedule, the column for 9 weeks to goal indicates that at the
end of that week you have 9 weeks until your second marathon. The
schedules continue week by week until race week.
We have included a specific workout for each day as well as a category
of training for that day. For example, in the 10-week schedule, on the
Friday of the 5-weeks-to-go column, the specific workout is an 8- to 9-mile
(13-14 km) run, and the category of training for that day is general aerobic
conditioning. This aspect of the schedules allows you to quickly see the
balance of training during each week and the progression of workouts from
week to week. Look again at the 10-week schedule—it’s easy to see that
with 5 weeks to go until the marathon, there are 3 recovery days that week
along with a V O2max session, a long run, a medium-long run, and a general
aerobic conditioning run. Looking at the row for Sunday, it’s easy to see
how the long runs progress and then taper in the last few weeks before the
marathon.
The workouts are divided into the following eight categories: long runs,
medium-long runs, marathon-pace runs, general aerobic runs, lactate
threshold (LT) runs, V O2max intervals, recovery runs, and speed training.
Each category is explained in depth in chapter 8, and the physiology behind
the training is explained in chapter 1.
MULTIPLE-MARATHONING
--- PAGE 332 ---
PRIORITIES
The following sections explain the priorities for the training schedules in
this chapter. But what if you don’t have 12, 10, 8, 6, or 4 weeks between
marathons?
If you have less than 4 weeks between marathons, you’re on your own.
Your main concern should be recovery, recovery, and more recovery.
For other amounts of time between marathons, follow these guidelines:
For 11 weeks between, do the 12-week schedule but skip the week “6
weeks to goal.”
For 9 weeks between, do the 10-week schedule but skip the week “5
weeks to goal,” and with 35 days to go, increase the distance of the
run to 18 miles (29 km).
For 7 weeks between, do the 8-week schedule but skip the week “3
weeks to goal,” and with 21 days to go, increase the distance of the
run to 18 miles (29 km).
For 5 weeks between, do the 6-week schedule but skip the week “2
weeks to goal,” and with 14 days to go, increase the medium-long
run to 16 miles (26 km).
12-WEEK SCHEDULE
A period of 12 weeks between marathons isn’t too bad. There’s a real risk,
however, of either taking it too easy and gradually losing marathon-specific
fitness or overdoing it and finding yourself at the starting line of marathon
number 2 feeling tired and wondering why you’re there. You need to find
the perfect balance for your individual situation. The best strategy is to
really take it easy for the first 3 or 4 weeks after your previous marathon to
ensure that your body is fully recovered. That leaves 8 or 9 weeks until the
next marathon, including 5 or 6 weeks of solid training and a 3-week taper.
The key training time is the 6-week period lasting from 7 weeks to go
through 2 weeks until the second marathon. The most important workouts
during those weeks are the tune-up races with 29 and 15 days to go; the
marathon-pace run with 42 days to go; the long runs with 49, 35, 28, and 21
--- PAGE 333 ---
days to go; the V O2max sessions with 39 and 25 days to go; and the
medium-long runs with 52, 44, 38, and 24 days until marathon number 2.
10-WEEK SCHEDULE
Allowing 10 weeks between marathons is almost reasonable, and the
schedule reflects this by providing 3 weeks of solid recovery, 4 weeks of
solid training, and a 3-week taper.
The key training weeks are those that end with 6, 5, 4, 3, and 2 weeks
until your second marathon. The most important workouts during those
weeks are the tune-up races with 29 and 15 days to go; the long runs with
42, 35, 28, 21, and 14 days to go; the LT session with 44 days to go; the
V O2max sessions with 39 and 25 days to go; and the medium-long runs
with 46, 38, and 24 days until marathon number 2. The only word of
caution concerning a 10-week time frame between marathons is to allow
yourself to recover fully from your previous marathon before training too
intensely for the next one.
8-WEEK SCHEDULE
The 8-week schedule allows you to recover thoroughly from your previous
marathon, train well for about 3 weeks, and then taper for marathon number
2. A period of 8 weeks between marathons is far less risky than 4 or 6
weeks. Even if your first marathon was in hot weather, or if you came out of
it with a minor injury, with a bit of luck you should still be OK for
marathon number 2.
The key training weeks are those that end with 4, 3, and 2 weeks until
the second marathon. The most important workouts during those weeks are
the tune-up race with 15 days to go, the long runs with 28 and 21 days to
go, the LT session with 30 days to go, the V O2max session with 25 days to
go, and the medium-long runs with 32 and 24 days until the marathon. Try
to avoid doing more than the schedules call for because 8 weeks between
marathons is still brief enough that you don’t have much room for error.
--- PAGE 334 ---
PETE’S OLYMPIC-YEAR DYNAMIC
DOUBLE
On May 26, 1984, I ran 2:11:43 to win the U.S. Olympic
Marathon Trials, and then on August 12, I placed 11th in 2:13:53
in the Olympics. Here’s how I approached the 11 weeks in
between.
I was on a bit of a high after winning the Trials, to say the
least. I took the next day off and went for a relaxed swim and a
pathetic 3-mile (5 km) shuffle two days after the race. The next
day I had my weekly massage, and my muscles weren’t too bad.
Building toward the Olympics, massages each week helped keep
me injury free despite the short recovery. I ran 45 miles (72 km)
the week after the Trials. Using the philosophy that I needed to
get the training in as quickly as possible to be able to taper again
and be in top form for the Olympics, I initially ran as I felt and got
in 112 miles (180 km) the second week and, rather foolishly, ran
151 miles (243 km) the third week. During the second week after
the Trials, I started doing a few strides every couple of days to try
to get my legs turning over. This seemed to help quite a bit.
In retrospect, I should have run 80 to 90 miles (129-145 km)
the second week and 110 to 120 miles (177-193 km) the third
week. Doing the amount I did showed a lack of confidence
because I wouldn’t have lost fitness by doing fewer miles. In fact,
if I had run less mileage right after the Trials, I probably would
have performed better at the Olympics. But I didn’t understand
that at the time.
The problem I faced was that in 11 weeks I couldn’t very well
do a 4-week recovery and a 3-week taper because that would
have left only 4 weeks to train to compete against the best
runners in the world. I got around that by cutting back the
recovery and getting back into fairly high-quality long intervals by
the fourth or fifth week after the Trials. The beauty of the short
recovery after the Trials was that I was fit enough to do my long
--- PAGE 335 ---
intervals at a good clip right away, so I didn’t need as long to
build into them. For example, in the fifth week after the Trials, I
did a 3-mile time trial on the track in 14:02.
I did continue, however, to train according to how I felt, with
flexibility both ways. For example, one day I headed out for a 15-
miler (24 km), felt good, and wound up going 26 miles (42 km).
On other days, I would postpone a track workout for a day or two
until my legs felt as if they could give a good effort without getting
injured.
I tapered more for the Olympics than for the Trials. This was
somewhat necessitated by tightness that I developed in my back
during the last 3 weeks before the race. It was also out of a
realization that I had trained too hard in the weeks after the Trials
and that my energy level needed time to come up a notch. This
is a very subjective matter, but I could tell during my training runs
that a bit of zip was missing and that it was better to cut back
and regain my strength. I did this by making my easy days—in
terms of speed and distance—easier. I also trimmed the volume
of my long runs and my speed workouts. This taper became the
model that I followed for the rest of my racing career.
—Pete Pfitzinger
6-WEEK SCHEDULE
The 6-week schedule was difficult to put together because 6 weeks is just
enough time to start to lose fitness if you don’t train enough, but it is also
just barely enough time to recover from marathon number 1 before you
need to taper for marathon number 2. The most important training weeks
are those that end 3 weeks and 2 weeks before marathon number 2. Those
weeks provide a small window during which you can train fairly hard
without wearing yourself out for the second marathon.
The key workouts during those weeks are the tune-up race with 15 days
to go, the long run with 14 days to go, the V O2max sessions with 23 and 19
days to go, and the medium-long runs with 25 and 21 days until the
--- PAGE 336 ---
marathon. This brief training stimulus will keep you in peak marathon
fitness so that after tapering, you should be close to your best.
4-WEEK SCHEDULE
The 4-week schedule is about as compact as you can get. This program
consists of 2 weeks of recovery merging into 2 weeks of taper. The
objective is to get you to the starting line injury free, fully recovered from
your previous marathon, and still in top shape. The mileage for this program
starts at 20 to 24 miles (32-39 km) and builds to 45 to 50 miles (72-80 km)
during the third week. Unfortunately, that’s also the penultimate week
before the marathon, so mileage and intensity building abruptly halt and
merge into a taper.
The most important workouts in this schedule are the medium-long run
with 10 days until marathon number 2 and the V O2max session with 12
days to go. If you need to do two marathons just 4 weeks apart (and need is
a relative term), this schedule should maximize your chances of success.
RACING STRATEGIES
Don’t do it!
Just kidding. You should definitely set a clear goal for the second (or
third, or fourth, …) marathon you’re running within a brief time frame.
Otherwise, you might very well find yourself only a few miles into it
wondering, “What am I doing here?” Being able to state what you want to
accomplish in your multiple marathoning will provide en route direction
and motivation. The longer you’ve allowed between marathons, the more
precisely you should be able to state your goals for marathon number 2
(beyond “to get through it”).
Once you’ve picked your goal, map out the splits you’ll need to hit.
Throughout this book, we’ve stressed the merits of showing restraint early
in the marathon to maximize your chances of being able to run a strong
second half. That advice is especially pertinent if you’ve already finished
one marathon in the last 12 weeks or sooner. Your multiple-marathoning
experience will almost certainly become a self-fulfilling death march if you
--- PAGE 337 ---
run too fast early in the race in the hope of building a cushion against an
inevitably slower second half.
Wait until the week before your second marathon to decide on a time
goal. Be realistic, taking into account how your recovery from your first
race went, the quality of your training in the interim, and whether you’ve
felt your energy level rise during your taper for marathon number 2.
Also consider the circumstances of your previous marathon. For
example, if you ran a huge personal best off of negative splits, there’s
probably room for improvement this time around. Or, say you wilted over
the last 10K the last time around and realize in retrospect that this was
because of a too-aggressive first 10 miles (16 km); you should be able to
make another attempt at your goal time for the first marathon. If, however,
you prepared with monk-like devotion for 24 weeks for your previous
marathon, shaving 3 seconds off your lifetime best, and your second
marathon is 4 weeks later, well, sorry, but this probably isn’t the time to try
for a 10-minute PR.
If you’ve never consciously tried to run a marathon with negative splits,
this might be the occasion to do so. Give yourself the first several miles to
get an accurate feel for how your body is responding to the challenge
you’ve set for it, and pick up the pace only when you’re fairly confident
that you can sustain it to the end.
AFTER THE MARATHON
If you’ve just run two or more marathons within a brief time span, your best
strategy for future success is to take a well-deserved break. A few weeks of
no running or easy training will help your body to recover and your mind to
develop new challenges. You have little to gain by rushing back into
training, and your risk of injury is exceptionally high at this point, owing to
the reduced resiliency of your muscles and connective tissue after running
multiple marathons.
--- PAGE 338 ---
Multiple Marathoning 12-Week Schedule
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
11 10 9 8
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-train
Tuesday Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 10 × 100
m strides
WednesdayRecovery
4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-14
km)
Med-long run
11-12 miles (18-19
km)
Thursday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
7-8 miles (11-13
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
LT
9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 20-25
minutes at LT pace
Saturday Recovery
4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Sunday Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-
21 km)
Long run
15-16 miles (24-26
km)
Weekly
volume
19-23 miles
(31-37 km)
30-35 miles (48-
56 km)
39-44 miles (63-
71 km)
52-58 miles (84-93
km)
Multiple Marathoning 12-Week Schedule
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
7 6 5 4
Monday Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
--- PAGE 339 ---
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
7 6 5 4
Tuesday V O2max
10-11 miles (16-
18 km) with 6 ×
800 m at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90% interval
time
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 10
× 100 m strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 6 × 600
m at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
WednesdayRecovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
V O2max
10-11 miles (16-
18 km) with 5 × 1
km at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles (16-
18 km)
Thursday Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-
21 km)
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-
24 km)
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 6 × 100
m strides
Friday Gen-aerobic +
speed
7-8 miles (11-13
km) with 6 × 10
sec hill sprints +
8 × 100 m strides
Med-long run
12-13 miles
(19-21 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-14
km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Saturday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles (10-
11 km) with 6 ×
100 m strides
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
8K-15K tune-up
race (total 10-14
miles [16-23 km])
Sunday Long run
17-18 miles (27-
29 km)
Marathon-pace
run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km) with
9 miles (14 km)
at marathon
pace
Long run
19-20 miles (31-
32 km)
Long run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km)
Weekly
volume
56-62 miles (90-
100 km)
60-66 miles
(97-106 km)
62-68 miles (100-
109 km)
54-63 miles (87-
101 km)
--- PAGE 340 ---
Multiple Marathoning 12-Week Schedule
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
3 2 1 Race week
Monday Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest
Tuesday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 6 × 600
m at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90% interval
time
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
WednesdayV O2max
11-12 miles (18-
19 km) with 6 × 1
km at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90% interval
time
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Dress
rehearsal
6-7 miles (10-
11 km) with 2
miles (3 km) at
marathon pace
Thursday Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-
24 km)
Recovery +
speed
5-6 miles (8-10
km) with 6 × 100
m strides
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 5 × 1 km
at 5K race pace;
jog 50%-90%
interval time
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Friday Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-14
km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery +
speed
4-5 miles (6-8
km) with 6 ×
100 m strides
Saturday Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
8K-10K tune-up
race (total 10-12
miles [16-19 km])
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 10 ×
100 m strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6
km)
Sunday Long run
19-20 miles (31-
32 km)
Long run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-
21 km)
Second
marathon
--- PAGE 341 ---
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
3 2 1 Race week
Weekly
volume
63-69 miles (101-
111 km)
52-59 miles (84-
95 km)
40-46 miles (64-
74 km)
21-27 miles
(34-43 km) (6
days prerace)
Multiple Marathoning 10-Week Schedule
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
9 8 7 6 5
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Tuesday Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 6
× 10 sec hill
sprints + 8 ×
100 m strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
WednesdayRecovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
Med-long run
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
V O2max
10-11 miles
(16-18 km) with
5 × 1 km at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Thursday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic
+ speed
7-8 miles
(11-13 km)
with 8 × 100
m strides
Gen-aerobic
+ speed
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
with 8 × 100
m strides
LT
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
with 20-25
minutes at LT
pace
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-
14 km)
Saturday Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Recovery +
speed
5-6 miles (8-
10 km) with 6
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
--- PAGE 342 ---
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
9 8 7 6 5
× 100 m
strides
Sunday Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11
km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Med-long
run
12-13 miles
(19-21 km)
Long run
16-17 miles
(26-27 km)
Long run
18-19 miles
(29-31 km)
Weekly
volume
19-23
miles (31-
37 km)
30-35 miles
(48-56 km)
39-44 miles
(63-71 km)
53-59 miles
(85-95 km)
61-67 miles
(98-108 km)
Multiple Marathoning 10-Week Schedule
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
4 3 2 1 Race week
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest or
cross-train
Rest
Tuesday V O2max
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
with 6 × 600
m at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
V O2max
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
with 6 × 600
m at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
with 8 × 100
m strides
Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
WednesdayGen-aerobic
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
V O2max
11-12 miles
(18-19 km)
with 6 × 1 km
at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles
(14-16 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Dress
rehearsal
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
with 2 miles
(3 km) at
marathon
pace
Thursday Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Med-long run
14-15 miles
(23-24 km)
Recovery +
speed
5-6 miles (8-
10 km) with 6
V O2max
8-9 miles
(13-14 km)
with 5 × 1 km
at 5K race
Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
--- PAGE 343 ---
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
4 3 2 1 Race week
with 6 × 100
m strides
× 100 m
strides
pace; jog
50%-90%
interval time
Friday Recovery
4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-
14 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-
8 km)
Recovery +
speed
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
with 6 × 100
m strides
Saturday 8K-10K tune-
up race (total
10-12 miles
[16-19 km])
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
8K-10K tune-
up race (total
10-12 miles
[16-19 km])
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
with 10 × 100
m strides
Recovery
2-4 miles
(3-6 km)
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles
(26-27 km)
Long run
19-20 miles
(31-32 km)
Long run
16-17 miles
(26-27 km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles
(19-21 km)
Second
marathon
Weekly
volume
54-61 miles
(87-98 km)
63-69 miles
(101-111 km)
52-59 miles
(84-95 km)
40-46 miles
(64-74 km)
21-27 miles
(34-43 km)
(6 days
prerace)
Multiple Marathoning 8-Week Schedule
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
7 6 5 4
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-train
Tuesday Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Gen-aerobic + speed
8-9 miles (13-14 km)
with 6 × 10 sec hill
sprints + 8 × 100 m
strides
WednesdayRecovery Recovery Gen-aerobic Med-long run
--- PAGE 344 ---
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
7 6 5 4
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
8-9 miles (13-14
km)
12-13 miles (19-21
km)
Thursday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
7-8 miles (11-13
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
Gen-aerobic +
speed
9-10 miles (14-
16 km) with 8 ×
100 m strides
LT
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
with 20-25 minutes at
LT pace
Saturday Recovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
with 6 × 100 m strides
Sunday Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-
16 km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-
21 km)
Long run
16-17 miles (26-27
km)
Weekly
volume
19-23 miles
(31-37 km)
30-35 miles (48-
56 km)
39-44 miles (63-
71 km)
54-60 miles (87-97
km)
Multiple Marathoning 8-Week Schedule
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
3 2 1 Race week
Monday Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest
Tuesday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 6 × 600
m at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90% interval
time
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
WednesdayV O2max
9-10 miles (14-16
km) with 5 × 1 km
at 5K race pace;
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Dress
rehearsal
6-7 miles (10-
11 km) with 2
--- PAGE 345 ---
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
3 2 1 Race week
jog 50%-90%
interval time
miles (3 km) at
marathon pace
Thursday Med-long run
14-15 miles (23-
24 km)
Recovery +
speed
5-6 miles (8-10
km) with 6 × 100
m strides
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14
km) with 6 ×
800m at 5K race
pace; jog
50%-90% interval
time
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Friday Gen-aerobic
8-9 miles (13-14
km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery +
speed
4-5 miles (6-8
km) with 6 ×
100 m strides
Saturday Recovery
6-7 miles (10-11
km)
8K-10K tune-up
race (total 10-12
miles [16-19 km])
Recovery +
speed
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 8 × 100
m strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6
km)
Sunday Long run
19-20 miles (31-
32 km)
Long run
16-17 miles (26-
27 km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-
21 km)
Second
marathon
Weekly
volume
61-67 miles (98-
108 km)
52-59 miles (84-
95 km)
40-46 miles (64-
74 km)
21-27 miles
(34-43 km) (6
days prerace)
Multiple Marathoning 6-Week Schedule
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
5 4 3
Monday Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-trainRest or cross-train
Tuesday Rest or cross-
train
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km) with 8 × 100
m strides
WednesdayRecovery Gen-aerobic Med-long run
--- PAGE 346 ---
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
5 4 3
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
7-8 miles (11-13 km)11-12 miles (18-19 km)
Thursday Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-trainRecovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles (8-
10 km)
Gen-aerobic + speed
7-8 miles (11-13 km)
with 8 × 100 m
strides
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14 km) with 6 × 600
m at 5K race pace; jog 50%-90%
interval time
Saturday Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8
km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Sunday Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
Gen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16
km)
Med-long run
13-14 miles (21-23 km)
Weekly
volume
19-23 miles
(31-37 km)
33-38 miles (53-61
km)
47-53 miles (76-85 km)
Multiple Marathoning 6-Week Schedule
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
2 1 Race week
Monday Rest or cross-train Rest or cross-train Rest
Tuesday V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14 km)
with 6 × 600 m at 5K
race pace; jog 50%-90%
interval time
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 8 × 100 m strides
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
WednesdayGen-aerobic
9-10 miles (14-16 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Dress rehearsal
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 2 miles (3
km) at marathon
pace
Thursday Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km) with
6 × 100 m strides
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14 km)
with 6 × 600m at 5K race
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
--- PAGE 347 ---
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
2 1 Race week
pace; jog 50%-90%
interval time
Friday Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Recovery + speed
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Saturday 8K-10K tune-up race
(total 10-12 miles [16-19
km])
Recovery + speed
6-7 miles (10-11 km)
with 8 × 100 m strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday Long run
16-17 miles (26-27 km)
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21 km)
Second marathon
Weekly
volume
52-59 miles (84-95 km)40-46 miles (64-74 km)21-27 miles (34-43
km) (6 days
prerace)
Multiple Marathoning 4-Week Schedule
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
3 2 1 Race week
Monday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Rest or cross-trainRest
Tuesday Rest or
cross-train
Recovery
6-7 miles (10-
11 km)
V O2max
8-9 miles (13-14 km)
with 6 × 600 m at 5K
race pace; jog
50%-90% interval time
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
WednesdayRecovery
4-5 miles
(6-8 km)
Gen-aerobic
7-8 miles (11-
13 km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
Dress rehearsal
6-7 miles (10-11
km) with 2 miles
(3 km) at
marathon pace
Thursday Rest or
cross-train
Rest or cross-
train
Med-long run
12-13 miles (19-21
km)
Recovery
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
--- PAGE 348 ---
WEEKS TO NEXT MARATHON
3 2 1 Race week
Friday Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Gen-aerobic +
speed
8-9 miles (13-
14 km) with 8 ×
100 m strides
Recovery
3-4 miles (5-6 km)
Recovery + speed
4-5 miles (6-8 km)
with 6 × 100 m
strides
Saturday Recovery
5-6 miles
(8-10 km)
Recovery
5-6 miles (8-10
km)
Recovery + speed
5-6 miles (8-10 km)
with 8 × 100 m strides
Recovery
2-4 miles (3-6 km)
Sunday Recovery
6-7 miles
(10-11 km)
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles
(16-18 km)
Gen-aerobic
10-11 miles (16-18
km)
Second marathon
Weekly
volume
20-24 miles
(32-39 km)
36-41 miles
(58-66 km)
42-48 miles (68-77
km)
21-27 miles (34-
43 km) (6 days
prerace)
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 349 ---
Appendix
A
MARATHON RACE-PACE
CHART
Goal Pace per mile5 miles 10K 10 miles 20K Halfway
2:10:00 4:57.5 24:47 30:48 49:35 1:01:36 1:05:00
2:15:00 5:09.0 25:45 32:00 51:30 1:04:00 1:07:30
2:20:00 5:20.4 26:42 33:11 53:24 1:06:22 1:10:00
2:25:00 5:31.8 27:39 34:22 55:18 1:08:44 1:12:30
2:30:00 5:43.2 28:36 35:33 57:12 1:11:06 1:15:00
2:35:00 5:54.7 29:33 36:44 59:07 1:13:28 1:17:30
2:40:00 6:06.1 30:30 37:55 1:01:01 1:15:50 1:20:00
2:45:00 6:17.6 31:28 39:06 1:02:56 1:18:12 1:22:30
2:50:00 6:29.0 32:25 40:17 1:04:50 1:20:34 1:25:00
2:55:00 6:40.5 33:22 41:28 1:06:45 1:22:56 1:27:30
3:00:00 6:51.9 34:19 42:39 1:08:39 1:25:18 1:30:00
3:05:00 7:03.3 35:16 43:50 1:10:33 1:27:40 1:32:30
3:10:00 7:14.8 36:14 45:02 1:12:28 1:30:04 1:35:00
3:15:00 7:26.2 37:11 46:13 1:14:22 1:32:26 1:37:30
3:20:00 7:37.7 38:08 47:24 1:16:17 1:34:48 1:40:00
3:25:00 7:49.1 39:05 48:35 1:18:11 1:37:10 1:42:30
--- PAGE 350 ---
Goal Pace per mile5 miles 10K 10 miles 20K Halfway
3:30:00 8:00.5 40:02 49:46 1:20:05 1:39:32 1:45:00
3:35:00 8:12.0 41:00 50:57 1:22:00 1:41:54 1:47:30
3:40:00 8:23.4 41:57 52:08 1:23:54 1:44:16 1:50:00
3:45:00 8:34.9 42:54 53:19 1:25:49 1:46:38 1:52:30
3:50:00 8:46.3 43:51 54:30 1:27:43 1:49:00 1:55:00
3:55:00 8:57.8 44:49 55:41 1:29:38 1:51:22 1:57:30
4:00:00 9:09.2 45:46 56:53 1:31:32 1:53:46 2:00:00
15 miles 30K 20 miles 40K 25 miles Finish
1:14:22 1:32:24 1:39:10 2:03:12 2:03:57 2:10:00
1:17:15 1:36:00 1:43:00 2:08:00 2:08:45 2:15:00
1:20:06 1:39:33 1:46:48 2:12:44 2:13:30 2:20:00
1:22:57 1:43:06 1:50:36 2:17:28 2:18:15 2:25:00
1:25:48 1:46:39 1:54:24 2:22:12 2:23:00 2:30:00
1:28:40 1:50:12 1:58:14 2:26:56 2:27:47 2:35:00
1:31:31 1:53:45 2:02:02 2:31:40 2:32:32 2:40:00
1:34:24 1:57:18 2:05:52 2:36:24 2:37:20 2:45:00
1:37:15 2:00:51 2:09:40 2:41:08 2:42:05 2:50:00
1:40:07 2:04:24 2:13:30 2:45:52 2:46:52 2:55:00
1:42:58 2:07:57 2:17:18 2:50:36 2:51:37 3:00:00
1:45:49 2:11:30 2:21:06 2:55:20 2:56:22 3:05:00
1:48:42 2:15:06 2:24:56 3:00:08 3:01:10 3:10:00
1:51:33 2:18:39 2:28:44 3:04:52 3:05:55 3:15:00
1:54:25 2:22:12 2:32:34 3:09:36 3:10:42 3:20:00
1:57:16 2:25:45 2:36:22 3:14:20 3:15:27 3:25:00
2:00:07 2:29:18 2:40:10 3:19:04 3:20:12 3:30:00
2:03:00 2:32:51 2:44:00 3:23:48 3:25:00 3:35:00
--- PAGE 351 ---
Goal Pace per mile5 miles 10K 10 miles 20K Halfway
2:05:51 2:36:24 2:47:48 3:28:32 3:29:45 3:40:00
2:08:43 2:39:57 2:51:38 3:33:16 3:34:32 3:45:00
2:11:34 2:43:30 2:55:26 3:38:00 3:39:17 3:50:00
2:14:27 2:47:03 2:59:16 3:42:44 3:44:05 3:55:00
2:17:18 2:50:39 3:03:04 3:47:32 3:48:50 4:00:00
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 352 ---
Appendix
B
EQUIVALENT RACE TIMES: 10K
THROUGH MARATHON
The following table provides an estimate of equivalent race performances
for the most popular distances between 10K and the marathon. The table is
meant to provide at-a-glance help in setting time goals.
Note the word estimate. Your training history, race terrain and weather,
experience at each distance, the level of competition, and your genetic
predisposition will influence how these times fit for you. The estimated
equivalences assume that you’re equally well trained for the various
distances. Also, the more recent the performances you’re assessing, the
more accurate the table will be.
Equivalent Race Times
10K 15K 10 miles Half marathon Marathon
27:00 41:35 45:00 60:00 2:06:22
28:00 43:07 46:40 62:13 2:11:02
29:00 44:40 48:20 64:26 2:15:43
30:00 46:12 50:00 66:40 2:20:24
31:00 47:44 51:40 68:53 2:25:05
32:00 49:17 53:20 71:06 2:29:46
33:00 50:49 55:00 73:20 2:34:26
--- PAGE 353 ---
10K 15K 10 miles Half marathon Marathon
34:00 52:22 56:40 75:33 2:39:07
35:00 53:54 58:20 77:46 2:43:48
36:00 55:26 60:00 1:20:00 2:48:29
37:00 56:59 61:40 1:22:13 2:53:10
38:00 58:31 63:20 1:24:26 2:57:50
39:00 60:04 65:00 1:26:40 3:02:31
40:00 61:36 66:40 1:28:53 3:07:12
41:00 63:08 68:20 1:31:06 3:11:53
42:00 64:41 70:00 1:33:19 3:16:34
43:00 66:13 71:40 1:35:33 3:21:14
44:00 67:46 73:20 1:37:46 3:25:55
45:00 69:18 75:00 1:40:00 3:30:42
46:00 70:50 76:40 1:42:12 3:35:17
47:00 72:23 78:20 1:44:26 3:39:58
48:00 73:55 1:20:00 1:46:40 3:44:38
49:00 75:28 1:21:40 1:48:53 3:49:19
50:00 77:00 1:23:20 1:51:06 3:54:00
51:00 78:32 1:25:00 1:53:19 3:58:41
52:00 1:20:05 1:26:40 1:55:32 4:03:22
53:00 1:21:37 1:28:20 1:57:46 4:08:02
54:00 1:23:10 1:30:00 2:00:00 4:12:43
55:00 1:24:42 1:31:40 2:02:13 4:17:24
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 354 ---
T
GLOSSARY
his glossary is purposefully short. It mostly contains the main
physiological terms used in this book that are highly pertinent to
marathon training and racing. It’s provided here for easy reference if
you’re reading the book other than from cover to cover.
biomechanics—How the various parts of your body work together to create your running form.
Although some features of your biomechanics, such as the structure of your bones, are primarily
genetically determined, improving your flexibility and strength may improve your running
biomechanics and therefore improve your marathon performance.
capillaries—The smallest blood vessels; several typically border each muscle fiber. With the correct
types of training, you’ll increase the number of capillaries per muscle fiber. By providing oxygen
directly to the individual muscle fibers, increased capillary density allows your rate of aerobic energy
production to increase. Capillaries also deliver fuel to the muscle fibers and remove waste products
such as carbon dioxide.
fast-twitch muscle fibers—Muscle fibers that contract and fatigue rapidly to power intense short-
term exercise such as sprinting. They’re classified into two primary categories: A and X. Fast-twitch
A fibers have more of the characteristics of slow-twitch fibers than do fast-twitch X. With endurance
training, your fast-twitch A fibers gain more of the characteristics of slow-twitch fibers and become
better at producing energy aerobically.
glycogen—The storage form of carbohydrate in your muscles and the main source of energy during
running.
heart rate reserve—Your maximal heart rate minus your resting heart rate. Heart rate reserve
reflects how much your heart rate can increase to pump more oxygen-rich blood to your muscles.
hemoglobin—A red blood cell protein that carries oxygen in the blood. The higher your hemoglobin
content, the more oxygen can be carried (per unit of blood) to your muscles to produce energy
aerobically.
lactate threshold (LT)—The exercise intensity above which your rate of lactate production is
substantially greater than your rate of lactate clearance. At effort levels above your lactate threshold,
the lactate concentration rises in your muscles and blood. The hydrogen ions associated with lactate
production inactivate the enzymes for energy production and may interfere with the uptake of
calcium, thereby reducing the muscles’ ability to contract. You can’t, therefore, maintain a pace faster
than your lactate-threshold pace for more than a few miles.
maximal cardiac output—The amount of blood your heart can pump per minute, which is maximal
heart rate per minute multiplied by the maximal amount of blood the heart can pump with each beat.
--- PAGE 355 ---
maximal heart rate—The highest heart rate you can attain during all-out running. Your maximal
heart rate is determined genetically. In other words, it doesn’t increase with training. Successful
marathoners don’t have particularly high maximal heart rates, so it isn’t a factor in determining
success.
maximal oxygen uptake—Commonly referred to as V O2max; the maximal amount of oxygen your
heart can pump to your muscles and your muscles can then use to produce energy. The combination
of your training and your genetics determines how high a V O2max you have.
mitochondria—The only part of your muscle fibers in which energy is produced aerobically. Think
of them as the aerobic energy factories in your muscle fibers. The right types of training increase the
size of your mitochondria (i.e., make bigger factories) and the number of mitochondria (i.e., make
more factories) in your muscle fibers.
periodization—Systematically structuring your training over a period of time to reach your goal.
running economy—How fast you can run using a given amount of oxygen. If you can run faster
than another athlete while using the same amount of oxygen, then you have better running economy.
Running economy can also be looked at as how much oxygen is required to run at a given speed. If
you use less oxygen while running at the same speed as another runner, then you’re more
economical.
slow-twitch muscle fibers—Muscle fibers that contract and tire slowly and that power sustained
submaximal exercise such as endurance running. Slow-twitch muscle fibers naturally resist fatigue,
and they have a high aerobic capacity, high capillary density, and other characteristics that make
them ideal for marathon running.
super shoes—Racing shoes with a rockered geometry, a high midsole of springy, resilient foam, and
a stabilizing plate (most often made of carbon fiber) in the midsole.
V O2max—See maximal oxygen uptake.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 356 ---
REFERENCES AND
RECOMMENDED READING
Azevedo, L.B., M.I. Lambert, P.S. Zogaib, and T.L. Barros Neto. 2010. “Maximal and Submaximal
Physiological Responses to Adaptation to Deep Water Running.” Journal of Sports Sciences 28
(4): 407-414.
Bailey, S.J., P. Winyard, A. Vanhatalo, J.R. Blackwell, F.J. DiMenna, D.P. Wilkerson, J. Tarr, N.
Benjamin, and A.M. Jones. 2009. “Dietary Nitrate Supplementation Reduces the O2 Cost of Low-
Intensity Exercise and Enhances Tolerance to High-Intensity Exercise in Humans.” Journal of
Applied Physiology 107 (4): 1144-1155.
Barnes K.R., W.G. Hopkins, M.R. McGuigan, and A.E. Kilding. 2013. “Effects of Different Uphill
Interval-Training Programs on Running Economy and Performance.” International Journal of
Sports Physiology and Performance 8: 639-647.
Barnes, K.R., and A.E. Kilding. 2015a. “Running Economy: Measurement, Norms, and Determining
Factors.” Sports Medicine-Open 1 (8).
Barnes, K.R., and A.E. Kilding. 2015b. “Strategies to Improve Running Economy.” Sports Medicine
45: 37-56.
Barreto, G., G.P. Esteves, F. Marticorena, T.N. Oliveira, J. Grgic, and B. Saunders. 2024. “Caffeine,
CYP1A2 Genotype, and Exercise Performance: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.”
Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 56 (2): 328-339.
Bartlett, J. D., J.A. Hawley and J.P. Morton. 2015. “Carbohydrate Availability and Exercise Training
Adaptation: Too Much of a Good Thing?” European Journal of Sport Science. 15 (1): 3-12.
Beck, O.N., S. Kipp, J.M. Roby, A.M. Grabowski, R. Kram, and J.D. Ortega. 2016. “Older Runners
Retain Youthful Running Economy Despite Biomechanical Differences.” Medicine and Science
in Sports and Exercise 48: 697-704.
Bell, D.G., and T.M. McLellan. 2002. “Exercise Endurance 1, 3, and 6 h After Caffeine Ingestion in
Caffeine Users and Nonusers.” Journal of Applied Physiology 93:1227-1234.
Bermon, S., L.M. Castell, P.C. Calder, N.C. Bishop, E. Blomstrand, F.C. Mooren, and R. Nagatomi.
2017. “Consensus Statement: Immunonutrition and Exercise.” Exercise Immunology Reviews 23,
8-50.
Billat V., A. Demarle, M. Paiva, and J.P. Koralsztein. 2002. “Effect of Training on the Physiological
Factors of Performance in Elite Marathon Runners (Males and Females).” International Journal
of Sports Medicine 23 (5): 336-341.
Bishop, P.A., E. Jones, and A.K. Woods. 2008. “Recovery From Training: A Brief Review.” Journal
of Strength and Conditioning Research 22 (3): 1015-1024.
--- PAGE 357 ---
Born, D.P., B. Sperlich, and H.C. Holmberg. 2013. “Bringing Light into the Dark: Effects of
Compression Clothing on Performance and Recovery.” International Journal of Sports
Physiology and Performance 8 (1): 4-18.
Bosquet, L., J. Montpetit, D. Arvisais, and I. Mujika. 2007. “Effects of Tapering on Performance: A
Meta-Analysis.” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 39: 1358-1365.
Brisswalter, J., and K. Nosaka. 2013. “Neuromuscular Factors Associated With Decline in Long-
Distance Running Performance in Master Athletes.” Sports Medicine 43: 51-63.
Broatch, James R., David J. Bishop, and Shona Halson. 2018. “Lower Limb Sports Compression
Garments Improve Muscle Blood Flow and Exercise Performance During Repeated-Sprint
Cycling.” International Journal of Sports Physiology & Performance 13 (7): 882-890.
Brooks G.A. 2020. “Lactate as a Fulcrum of Metabolism.” Redox Biology 35: 101454.
Burden, R.J., K. Morton, T. Richards, G.P. Whyte, and C.R. Pedlar. 2015. “Is Iron Treatment
Beneficial in Iron-Deficient but Non-Anaemic (IDNA) Endurance Athletes? A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.” British Journal of Sports Medicine 49 (21): 1389-1397.
Burke, L.M. 2007. “Nutrition Strategies for the Marathon: Fuel for Training and Racing.” Sports
Medicine 37 (4/5): 344-347.
Burke, L.M. 2008. “Caffeine and Sports Performance.” Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and
Metabolism 33: 1319-1334.
Burke, L.M., and R.J. Maughan. 2015. “The Governor Has a Sweet Tooth—Mouth Sensing of
Nutrients to Enhance Sports Performance.” European Journal of Sport Science 15 (1): 29-40.
Burke, L.M. 2021. “Ketogenic Low-CHO, High-Fat Diet: The Future of Elite Endurance Sport?” The
Journal of Physiology 599 (3): 819-43.
Cadegiani, F. A., and C.E. Kater. 2018. “Body Composition, Metabolism, Sleep, Psychological and
Eating Patterns of Overtraining Syndrome: Results of the EROS Study (EROS-PROFILE).”
Journal of Sports Sciences, 36 (16): 1902-1910.
Cao, J., S. Lei, X. Wang, and S. Cheng. 2021. “The Effect of a Ketogenic Low-Carbohydrate, High-
Fat Diet on Aerobic Capacity and Exercise Performance in Endurance Athletes: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.” Nutrients 13 (8): 2896.
Chaillou, T., V. Treigyte, S. Mosely, M. Brazaitis, T. Venckunas, and A.J. Cheng. 2022. “Functional
Impact of Post-Exercise Cooling and Heating on Recovery and Training Adaptations: Application
to Resistance, Endurance, and Sprint Exercise.” Sports Medicine - Open 8 (1): 37.
Churchward-Venne, T.A., P.J.M. Pinckaers, J.S.J. Smeets, M.W. Betz, J.M. Senden, J.P.B. Goessens,
A.P. Gijsen, I. Rollo, L.B. Verdijk, and L.J.C. van Loon. 2020. “Dose-Response Effects of
Dietary Protein on Muscle Protein Synthesis During Recovery From Endurance Exercise in
Young Men: A Double-Blind Randomized Trial.” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 112
(2): 303-317.
Clark, N. 2020. Nancy Clark’s Sports Nutrition Guidebook. 6th ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Coyle, E.F. 2007. “Physiological Regulation of Marathon Performance.” Sports Medicine 37 (4/5):
306-311.
Craig, W.J., and A.R. Mangels. 2009. “Position of the American Dietetic Association: Vegetarian
Diets.” Journal of the American Dietetic Association 109: 1266-1282.
Daniels, J. 2022. Daniels’ Running Formula. 4th ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Devita, P., R.E. Fellin, J.F. Seay, E. Ip, N. Stavro, and S.P. Messier. 2016. “The Relationships
Between Age and Running Biomechanics.” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 48 (1):
--- PAGE 358 ---
98-106.
Dobbs, W.C., M.V. Fedewa, H.V. MacDonald, C.J. Holmes, Z.S. Cicone, D.J. Plews, and M.R. Esco.
2019. “The Accuracy of Acquiring Heart Rate Variability From Portable Devices: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.” Sports Medicine, 49 (3): 417-435.
Düking, P., C. Zinner, J.L. Reed, H.C. Holmberg, and B. Sperlich. 2020. “Predefined vs. Data-
Guided Training Prescription Based on Autonomic Nervous System Variation: A Systematic
Review.” Scandinavian Journal Medicine and Science in Sports 30: 2291-2304.
Dupuy, O., W. Douzi, D. Theurot, L. Bosquet, and B. Dugué. 2018. “An Evidence-Based Approach
for Choosing Post-Exercise Recovery Techniques to Reduce Markers of Muscle Damage,
Soreness, Fatigue, and Inflammation: A Systematic Review With Meta-Analysis.” Frontiers in
Physiology 9: 1-15.
Eberle, S.G. 2014. Endurance Sports Nutrition. 3rd ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Eichner, E.R. 2012. “Pearls and Pitfalls: Everyone Needs Iron.” Current Sports Medicine Reports 11
(2): 50-51.
Fair, R.C., and E.H. Kaplan. 2018. “Estimating Aging Effects in Running Events.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 100 (4): 704–711.
Frazier, M., and S. Romine. 2017. The No Meat Athlete Cookbook. New York: The Experiment.
Gao, C., S. Gupta, T. Adli, W. Hou, R. Coolsaet, A. Hayes, K. Kim, A. Pandey, J. Gordon, G. Chahil,
E.P. Belley-Cote, and R.P. Whitlock. 2021. “The Effects of Dietary Nitrate Supplementation on
Endurance Exercise Performance and Cardiorespiratory Measures in Healthy Adults: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition
18 (1): 1-11.
Gellish, R.L., B.R. Goslin, R.E. Olson, A. McDonald, G.D. Russi, and V.K. Moudgil. 2007.
“Longitudinal Modeling of the Relationship Between Age and Maximal Heart Rate.” Medicine
and Science in Sports and Exercise 39 (5): 822-829.
Gonçalves, L. de S., V. de S. Painelli, G. Yamaguchi, L.F. de Oliveira, B. Saunders, R.P. da Silva, B.
Gualano. 2017. “Dispelling the Myth That Habitual Caffeine Consumption Influences the
Performance Response to Acute Caffeine Supplementation.” Journal of Applied Physiology 123
(1): 213-220.
Grivas, G.V. 2018. “The Effects of Tapering on Performance in Elite Endurance Runners: A
Systematic Review.” International Journal of Sports Science 8 (1): 8-13.
Guest, N., P. Corey, J. Vescovi, and A. El-Sohemy. 2018. “Caffeine, CYP1A2 Genotype, and
Endurance Performance in Athletes.” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 50 (8): 1570-
1578.
Guest, N.S., T.A. VanDusseldorp, M.T. Nelson, J. Grgic, B.J. Schoenfeld, N.D.M. Jenkins, S.M.
Arent, J. Antonio, J.R. Stout, E.T. Trexler, A.E. Smith-Ryan, E.R. Goldstein, D.S. Kalman, and
B.I. Campbell. 2021. “International Society of Sports Nutrition Position Stand: Caffeine and
Exercise Performance.” Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition 18 (1): 1-37.
Gulati M., L.J. Shaw, R.A. Thisted, H.R. Black, C.N. Bairey Merz, and M.F. Arnsdorf. 2010. “Heart
Rate Response to Exercise Stress Testing in Asymptomatic Women: The St. James Women Take
Heart Project.” Circulation 122(2): 130–7, 2010.
Haghighat, N., and T. Stull. 2024. “Up-to-Date Understanding of Overtraining Syndrome and
Overlap With Related Disorders.” Sports Psychiatry 3 (1): 31-38.
--- PAGE 359 ---
Hawley, J.A., and F.J. Spargo. 2007. “Metabolic Adaptations to Marathon Training and Racing.”
Sports Medicine 37 (4/5): 328-331.
Hayes, P.R., A. Walker. 2007. “Pre-Exercise Stretching Does Not Impact Upon Running Economy.”
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 21: 1227-1232.
Hoff, J., Ø. Støren, A. Finstad, E. Wang, and J. Helgerud. 2016. “Increased Blood Lactate Level
Deteriorates Running Economy in World Class Endurance Athletes.” Journal of Strength and
Conditioning Research 30 (5): 1373-1378.
Hunter, I., K. Lee, J. Ward, and J. Tracy. 2017. “Self-Optimization of Stride Length Among
Experienced and Inexperienced Runners.” International Journal of Exercise Science 10 (3): 446-
453.
Impey, S.G., M.A. Hearris, K.M. Hammond, J.D. Bartlett, J. Louis, G.L. Close, and J.P. Morton.
2018. “Fuel for the Work Required: A Theoretical Framework for Carbohydrate Periodization and
the Glycogen Threshold Hypothesis.” Sports Medicine 48 (5): 1031-1048.
Jensen M., H. Hsu-Han, J.P. Porcari, B.E. Arney, S. Doberstein, K. Radtke, and C. Foster. 2019. “A
Comparison of Energy Expenditure when Exercising on 10 Indoor Exercise Machines.”
International Journal of Research Exercise Physiology 14 (2): 84-94.
Jones, A.M. 2014. “Influence of Dietary Nitrate on the Physiological Determinants of Exercise
Performance: A Critical Review.” Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism 39 (9): 1019-
1028.
Joubert, D.P., T.A. Dominy, and G.T. Burns. 2023. “Effects of Highly Cushioned and Resilient
Racing Shoes on Running Economy at Slower Running Speeds.” International Journal of Sports
Physiology & Performance 18 (2): 164-170.
Joubert, D.P., and G.P. Jones 2022. “A Comparison of Running Economy across Seven Highly
Cushioned Racing Shoes with Carbon-Fibre Plates.” Footwear Science 14 (2): 71–83.
Kenefick, R., S. Cheuvront, and M. Sawka. 2007. “Thermoregulatory Function During the
Marathon.” Sports Medicine 37 (4/5): 312-315.
Killgore, G.L. 2012. “Deep-Water Running: A Practical Review of the Literature With an Emphasis
on Biomechanics.” The Physician and Sportsmedicine 40 (1): 116-126.
Klein, M., and C. Patterson. 2023. “Changes in Running Biomechanics in Master Runners over Age
50: A Systematic Review.” Sports Biomechanics, June: 1-29.
Knechtle, B., C.A. Rust, and T.R. Knechtle. 2012. “Does Muscle Mass Affect Running Times in
Male Long-Distance Master Runners?” Asian Journal of Sports Medicine 3: 247-256.
Larson-Meyer, D.E., and M. Ruscigno. 2020. Plant-Based Sports Nutrition. Champaign, IL: Human
Kinetics.
Lee, E.J., E.M. Snyder, and C.J. Lundstrom. 2020. “Predictors of Long-Distance Race Performance
in Master Runners.” Journal of Human Sport & Exercise 15 (2): 355-366.
Lis, D.M., T. Stellingwerff, C.M. Shing, K.D.K. Ahuja, and J.W. Fell. 2015. “Exploring the
Popularity, Experiences, and Beliefs Surrounding Gluten-Free Diets in Nonceliac Athletes.”
International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism 25 (1): 37-45.
Llanos-Lagos, C., R. Ramirez-Campillo, J. Moran, and E. Sáez de Villarreal. 2024. “The Effect of
Strength Training Methods on Middle-Distance and Long-Distance Runners’ Athletic
Performance: A Systematic Review With Meta-Analysis.” Sports Medicine 54 (7): 1801-1833.
Lopes, T.R., H.M. Pereira, L.R.A. Bittencourt, and B.M. Silva. 2023. “How Much Does Sleep
Deprivation Impair Endurance Performance? A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.”
--- PAGE 360 ---
European Journal of Sport Science 23 (7): 1279-1292.
Lundstrom, C.J., N.A. Foreman, and G. Biltz. 2023. “Practices and Applications of Heart Rate
Variability Monitoring in Endurance Athletes.” International Journal of Sports Medicine 44 (1):
9-19.
Machado Araujo, A., R.K. Cardoso, and A.J. Rombaldi. 2018. “Post-Exercise Effects of Graduated
Compression Garment Use on Skeletal Muscle Recovery and Delayed Onset Muscle Soreness: A
Systematic Review.” Motricidade 14 (2-3): 129-137.
Maughan, R.J., L.M. Burke, J. Dvorak, D.E. Larson-Meyer, P. Peeling, S.M. Phillips, and A.
Ljungqvist. 2018. “IOC Consensus Statement: Dietary Supplements and the High-Performance
Athlete.” International Journal of Sport Nutrition and Exercise Metabolism 28 (2): 104-125.
Matties, J.R., and K.M. Rowley. 2023. “A pilot study: effects of an 8-week training intervention in
carbon-plated running shoes.” Footwear Science 15: S182-S183.
McCubbin, A.J., A. Zhu, S.K. Gaskell, and R.J.S. Costa. 2020. “Hydrogel Carbohydrate-Electrolyte
Beverage Does Not Improve Glucose Availability, Substrate Oxidation, Gastrointestinal
Symptoms, or Exercise Performance, Compared With a Concentration and Nutrient-Matched
Placebo.” International Journal of Sport Nutrition & Exercise Metabolism 30 (1): 25-33.
McKean, K.A., N.A, Manson, and W.D. Stanish. 2006. “Musculoskeletal Injury in the Masters
Runners.” Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine, 16 (2): 149-154.
McSwiney, F.T., B. Wardrop, L. Doyle, P.N. Hyde, R.A. Lafountain, and J.S. Volek. 2018. “Keto-
Adaptation Enhances Exercise Performance and Body Composition Responses to Training in
Endurance Athletes.” Metabolism: Clinical and Experimental 81: 25-34.
Meeusen, R., M. Duclos, C. Foster, A. Fry, M. Gleeson, D. Nieman, J. Raglin, G. Rietjens, J.
Steinacker, and A. Urhausen. 2013. “Prevention, Diagnosis, and Treatment of the Overtraining
Syndrome: Joint Consensus Statement of the European College of Sport Science (ECSS) and the
American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM).” European Journal of Sport Science 13 (1): 1-24.
Midgley, A.W., L.R. McNaughton, and A.M. Jones. 2007. “Training to Enhance the Physiological
Determinants of Long-Distance Running Performance.” Sports Medicine 37: 857-880.
Mountjoy, M., K.E. Ackerman, D.M. Bailey, L.M. Burke, N. Constantini, A.C. Hackney, I.A.
Heikura, A. Melin, A.M. Pensgaard, T. Stellingwerff, J.K. Sundgot-Borgen, M.K. Torstveit, A.U.
Jacobsen, E. Verhagen, R. Budgett, L. Engebretsen, and U. Erdener. 2023. “2023 International
Olympic Committee’s (IOC) Consensus Statement on Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport
(REDs).” British Journal of Sports Medicine 57 (17): 1073-1097.
Mujika, I. 2010. “Intense Training: The Key to Optimal Performance Before and During the Taper.”
Supplement 2, Scandinavian Journal of Medicine and Science in Sports 20: 24-31.
Nieman, D.C. 2007. “Marathon Training and Immune Function.” Sports Medicine 37 (4/5): 412-415.
Nikolaidis P.T., T. Rosemann, and B. Knechtle. 2018. “Age-Predicted Maximal Heart Rate in
Recreational Marathon Runners: A Cross-Sectional Study on Fox’s and Tanaka’s Equations.”
Frontiers in Physiology 9: 226.
Noakes, T.D. 2003. Lore of Running. 4th ed. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Noakes, T.D. 2007. “Hydration in the Marathon: Using Thirst to Gauge Safe Fluid Replacement.”
Sports Medicine 37 (4/5): 463-466.
Noakes, Timothy David. 2011. “Time to Move beyond a Brainless Exercise Physiology: The
Evidence for Complex Regulation of Human Exercise Performance.” Applied Physiology,
Nutrition & Metabolism 36 (1): 23-35.
--- PAGE 361 ---
Peeling, P., B. Dawson, C. Goodman, G. Landers, and D. Trinder. 2008. “Athletic Induced Iron
Deficiency: New Insights into the Role of Inflammation, Cytokines, and Hormones.” European
Journal of Applied Physiology 103 (4): 381-391.
Plews, D.J., P.B. Laursen, J. Stanley, A.E. Kilding, and M. Buchheit. 2013. “Training Adaptation and
Heart Rate Variability in Elite Endurance Athletes: Opening the Door to Effective Monitoring.”
Sports Medicine 43 (9): 773-781.
Plotkin, D.L., M.D. Roberts, C.T. Haun, and B.J. Schoenfeld. 2021. “Muscle Fiber Type Transitions
With Exercise Training: Shifting Perspectives.” Sports 9: 127.
Poppendieck, W., O. Faude, M. Wegmann, and T. Meyer. 2013. “Cooling and Performance Recovery
of Trained Athletes: A Meta-Analytical Review.” International Journal of Sports Physiology and
Performance 8 (3): 227-242.
Poppendieck, W., M. Wegmann, A. Hecksteden, A. Darup, J. Schimpchen, S. Skorski, A. Ferrauti, M.
Kellmann, M. Pfeiffer, and T. Meyer. 2021. “Does Cold-Water Immersion After Strength Training
Attenuate Training Adaptation?” International Journal of Sports Physiology & Performance 16
(2): 304–10.
Pfitzinger, P., and P. Latter. 2015. Faster Road Racing. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Reaburn, P., and B. Dascombe. 2008. “Endurance Performance in Masters Athletes.” European
Reviews of Aging and Physical Activity 5: 31-42.
Rowe, J.T., R.F.G.J. King, A.J. King, D.J. Morrison, T. Preston, O.J. Wilson, and J.P. O’Hara. 2022.
“Glucose and Fructose Hydrogel Enhances Running Performance, Exogenous Carbohydrate
Oxidation, and Gastrointestinal Tolerance.” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 54 (1):
129-140.
Ryan, B.D., T.W. Beck, T.J. Herda, H.R. Hull, M.J. Hartman, J.R. Stout, and J.T. Cramer. 2008. “Do
Practical Durations of Stretching Alter Muscle Strength? A Dose-Response Study.” Medicine and
Science in Sports and Exercise 40: 1529-1537.
Santisteban, K.J., A.T. Lovering, J.R. Halliwill, and C.T. Minson. 2022. “Sex Differences in V O2max
and the Impact on Endurance Exercise Performance.” International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health 19: 4946.
Saunders, P., D. Pyne, R. Telford, and J. Hawley. 2004. “Factors Affecting Running Economy in
Trained Distance Runners.” Sports Medicine 34: 465-485.
Shookster, D., B. Lindsey, N. Cortes, and J.R. Martin. 2020. “Accuracy of Commonly Used Age-
Predicted Maximal Heart Rate Equations.” International Journal of Exercise Science 13 (7):
1242-1250.
Simpson, N.S., E.L. Gibbs, and G.O. Matheson. 2017. “Optimizing Sleep to Maximize Performance:
Implications and Recommendations for Elite Athletes.” Scandinavian Journal of Medicine and
Science in Sports 27 (3): 266-274.
Southward, K., K.J. Rutherfurd-Markwick, and A. Ali. 2018. “Correction to: The Effect of Acute
Caffeine Ingestion on Endurance Performance: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Sports
Medicine 48: 2425-2441.
Stellingwerff, T. 2013. “Contemporary Nutrition Approaches to Optimize Elite Marathon
Performance.” International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance 8 (5): 573-578.
Suominen, H. 2011. “Ageing and Maximal Physical Performance.” European Reviews of Aging and
Physical Activity 8: 37-42.
--- PAGE 362 ---
Sutehall, S., B. Muniz-Pardos, A. Bosch, and Y. Pitsiladis. 2022. “The Effect of Sodium Alginate and
Pectin Added to a Carbohydrate Beverage on Endurance Performance, Substrate Oxidation and
Blood Glucose Concentration: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Sports Medicine -
Open 8: 82.
Svedenhag, J., and J. Seger. 1992. “Running on Land and in Water: Comparative Exercise
Physiology.” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 24: 1155-1160.
Tanaka, H., K.D. Monahan, and D.R. Seals. 2001. “Age-Predicted Maximal Heart Rate Revisited.”
Journal of the American College of Cardiology 37 (1): 153-156.
Thomas, D.T., K.A. Erdman, and L.M. Burke. 2016. “Position of the Academy of Nutrition and
Dietetics, Dietitians of Canada, and the American College of Sports Medicine: Nutrition and
Athletic Performance.” Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics 116 (3): 501-528.
Uckert, S., and W. Joch. 2007. “Effects of Warm-Up and Precooling on Endurance Performance in
the Heat.” British Journal of Sports Medicine 6: 380-384.
Van Hooren, B., and J.M. Peake. 2018. “Do We Need a Cool-Down After Exercise? A Narrative
Review of the Psychophysiological Effects and the Effects on Performance, Injuries, and the
Long-Term Adaptive Response.” Sports Medicine 48 (7): 1575-1595.
Venter, R.E. 2012. “Role of Sleep in Performance and Recovery of Athletes.” South African Journal
for Research in Sport, Physical Education, and Recreation 34: 167-184.
Vikmoen, O., T. Raastad, O. Seynnes, K. Bergstrøm, S. Ellefsen, and B.R. Rønnestad. 2016. “Effects
of Heavy Strength Training on Running Performance and Determinants of Running Performance
in Female Endurance Athletes.” PLOS One 11 (3): 1-18.
Volek, J.S., D.J. Freidenreich, C. Saenz, L.J. Kunces, B.C. Creighton, J.M. Bartley, P.M. Davitt, C.X.
Munoz, J.M. Anderson, C.M. Maresh, E.C. Lee, M.D. Schuenke, G. Aerni, W.J. Kraemer, and
S.D. Phinney. 2016. “Clinical Science: Metabolic Characteristics of Keto-Adapted Ultra-
Endurance Runners. Metabolism 65: 100-110.
Walsh, N.P., M. Gleeson, R.J. Shephard, M. Gleeson, J.A. Woods, N.C. Bishop, M. Fleshner, C.
Green, B.K. Pedersen, L. Hoffman-Goetz, C.J. Rogers, H. Northoff, A. Abbasi, and P. Simon.
2011. “Position Statement Part One: Immune Function and Exercise.” Exercise Immunology
Review 17: 6-63.
Weerapong, P., P.A. Hume, and G.S. Kolt. 2005. “The Mechanisms of Massage and Effects on
Performance, Muscle Recovery, and Injury Prevention.” Sports Medicine 35 (3): 235-256.
Wiewelhove, T., A. Döweling, C. Schneider, L. Hottenrott, T. Meyer, M. Kellmann, M. Pfeiffer, and
A. Ferrauti. 2019. “A Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Foam Rolling on Performance and
Recovery.” Frontiers in Physiology 10: 376.
Wirnitzer, K., D. Tanous, M. Motevalli, K. Wagner, C. Raschner, G. Wirnitzer, C. Leitzmann, T.
Rosemann, and B. Knechtle. 2023. “Racing Experiences of Recreational Distance Runners
Following Omnivorous, Vegetarian, and Vegan Diets (Part B)—Results From the NURMI Study
(Step 2).” Nutrients 15 (10): 2243.
Wiswell, R.A., S.V. Jaque, T.J. Marcell, S.A. Hawkins, K.M. Tarpenning, N. Constantino, and D.M.
Hyslop. 2000. “Maximal Aerobic Power, Lactate Threshold, and Running Performance in Master
Athletes.” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 32 (6): 1165-1170.
Wondem, D.A., and Z.M. Tegegne. 2023. “Effect of Concurrent Strength and Endurance Training on
Distance Running Performances in Well-Trained Athletes.” Sport Mont 21 (3): 101-107.
--- PAGE 363 ---
Wong, S.H., P.M. Siu, A. Lok, Y.J. Chen, J. Morris, and C.W. Lam. 2008. “Effect of the Glycemic
Index of Pre-Exercise Carbohydrate Meals on Running Performance.” European Journal of Sport
Science 8: 23-33.
Young, B.W., N. Medic, P.L. Weir, and J.L. Starkes. 2008. “Explaining Performance in Elite Middle-
Aged Runners: Contribution From Age and From Ongoing and Past Training Factors.” Journal of
Sport and Exercise Psychology 30: 737-754.
Zinn, C., M. Wood, M. Williden, S. Chatterton, and E. Maunder. 2017. “Ketogenic Diet Benefits
Body Composition and Well-Being but Not Performance in a Pilot Case Study of New Zealand
Endurance Athletes.” Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition 14 (1): 1-9.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 364 ---
INDEX
Note: The italicized f and t following page numbers refer to figures and
tables, respectively.
A
adaptation process 58-59
adrenaline levels 74
aerobic enzyme activity 6, 39
age considerations. See masters runners
aid stations 24, 36, 53-55, 141, 151-152, 154
Albertson, CJ 244-245
alcohol consumption 37, 125
American College of Sports Medicine 32, 45, 49
anemia 46
Assefa, Tigst 146
B
back-to-back hard training days 61-66
beet juice 51-52
bench dips 106-107
bent-leg calf stretch 92-93, 123
bicycle crunch 101
bird dog 98-99
Bjorklund, Garry 21
blood volume 9, 32, 46, 47, 49, 140
body composition changes 121-123
body weight 35, 38, 45, 45t, 71, 75
Brandt, Michael 212-213
Bruce, Stephanie 40
C
caffeine 34-35, 51
calf raises 106, 123
calf stretches 92-93, 123
caloric deficits 71
--- PAGE 365 ---
capillary density 5, 7, 58, 102
carbohydrate loading 38-39, 140, 144
carbohydrates. See also glycogen storage
after running 64
in daily training diet 40
depletion of 62
as energy source 37-39
high-fat/low-carb diets 42-43
hydration and 36
midrace intake of 53-54, 154, 158
prerace intake of 52
for replenishing glycogen stores 44
Castella, Rob de 157
cat-cow pose 64, 87
celiac disease 40
Chepngetich, Ruth 146
Clark, Nancy 44
clothing considerations 64
cold-water immersion 74, 77
complete marathon training plans 25-26, 26t
compression apparel 80-81
cool-downs 11, 74, 116-117, 167, 171, 228
core strength training 96-101, 97t, 140-141
cross-country skiing 114, 117
cross-training
benefits of 112-113
in cool-downs 74
cross-country skiing and 114, 117
cycling and 114-115
elliptical training and 114, 117
for masters runners 125
on recovery days 10, 66, 68, 113, 184-185, 198, 214, 229
swimming and 114, 118
tapering 140-141
water running and 114-117
cruise intervals. See interval training
cycling 114-115
D
Daniels, Jack 16, 63
dehydration. See also hydration
--- PAGE 366 ---
alcohol and 37
hard training and 58
heart rate and 19
overreaching and 69
physiology of 32-33
prevention of 32, 35, 38, 52, 55, 154
recovery and 75-77, 125, 246
delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS) 61-63, 74, 80-81
diet. See nutrition
double runs 171-173, 211-212, 227-228
double threshold days 12
Douglas, Scott 129-130
drafting 150
drinking-while-running technique 54-55
driving to run 64
dropping out of races 156, 157
dynamic stretching 86-91, 87t
E
easy days 10, 66-68, 125
eating habits. See nutrition
Eberle, Suzanne Girard 45
elliptical training 114, 117
energy drinks 34, 36
energy gels 24, 36, 53
energy levels 46, 70, 71, 75-77, 163, 250, 252
equivalent race times 265-266
ergogenic aids 50-52
exercises
core strength training 96-101, 97t
flexibility training 86-96, 87t, 92t
running form drills 109-112
strength training 102-109, 103t
G
gastrointestinal (GI) system 35, 36, 40, 46, 48
general aerobic runs 10, 117, 130, 163-165, 168-170, 174
genetic influences 4, 5, 9, 33, 34, 58-60
gluten-free diets 40-41
glute stretch 95
glycemic index 44
glycogen loading 38-39
--- PAGE 367 ---
glycogen storage
carbohydrate intake for 38-39, 140, 144
hard/easy principle and 61
improvement of 12-16
in marathon physiology 4, 7, 12-16
replenishment strategies 43-44, 61
in train low/race high strategy 39
warm-ups and 144
Glynn, Matt 166-167
GPS watches 27, 156
Groner, Roberta 127-128
H
Hall, Ryan 41, 42
Hall, Sara 41-42
hamstring stretches 92, 93
hard/easy principle 61-66
Hassan, Sifan 4-5, 149-150
heart rate drift 19
heart rate intensity
maximal 9, 13-14, 17-19, 18t, 22, 24
as recovery monitor 75, 185, 198, 214, 229
for training workouts 14, 164, 165, 167-170, 171t
water running and 116
heart rate monitors 17, 18, 75, 185, 198, 214, 229, 246
heart rate reserve 13-14, 17-19, 18t, 22, 24
heart rate variability (HRV) 75, 77, 80
heat exhaustion 32, 156
hemoglobin 9, 46, 47, 49, 71
high-fat/low-carb (HFLC) diets 42-43
high-volume training
recommendations for 225-229
training schedule for 230-242
hill training
for masters runners 123
running economy and 16, 19
in speed work 170-171
as strength training 104
in training schedule 174
for V O2max improvement 23, 24
hip flexor stretches 92, 94
--- PAGE 368 ---
hip rotator stretch 95
HRV (heart rate variability) 75, 77, 80
Huddle, Molly 136
hydration. See also dehydration
after running 64
fluid types for 36-37
fluid volume needed for 35
importance of 32
for masters runners 124-125
midrace intake of fluids 52-55, 154, 159
prerace intake of fluids 52
for race day 52-55, 154, 159
as recovery monitor 76
at workplace 35, 68
hyponatremia 52, 54
I
illnesses 61-62, 175
immune system 39, 44, 51, 61-62, 134
individual training thresholds 68-69
injuries
cross-training and 112, 113
female athlete triad and 72
marathon-pace runs and 24
masters runners and 123, 129-131
mileage increases and 20
prevention of 76, 78-79, 96, 102
risk of 13, 15, 75, 80, 85-86, 102-103, 165
training interruptions due to 175
integrated training 24-25
International Olympic Committee (IOC) 34, 51
interval training
in fatigued state 65
for lactate threshold improvement 11-12
for maximal heart rate determination 17
recovery from 60, 60t
for running economy improvement 16, 19
for tempo runs 168, 168t
too fast and too frequent 23
tune-up races and 29, 29t
for V O2max improvement 22-24, 169-170
--- PAGE 369 ---
water running and 116
IOC (International Olympic Committee) 34, 51
iron
blood tests for 48-49, 71
deficiency of 46-50, 62
functions of 46
low levels in marathoners 46-48
preventing depletion of 49-50
recommended daily intake 49
in vegetarian/vegan diets 47-49, 51
K
Kaplan, Edward 120
Kastor, Deena 42, 148
Kawauchi, Yuki 245
Keflezighi, Meb 117, 131, 245
ketogenic diets 42
kickouts (B-skip) 112
Kipchoge, Eliud 146-148
Kiptum, Kelvin 146
knee hugs 90
L
lactate levels 19, 23, 62, 74, 145
lactate threshold (LT) 4-8, 11-13, 167-168
lactate-threshold intervals. See interval training
lactate-threshold runs. See tempo runs
Landau, Kate 126-127
Larson-Meyer, Enette 48
lat stretch 96
leg push-away 99
leg swings 88
long training runs
carbohydrate loading and 39
in fatigued state 65
heart rate intensity in 14
at marathon pace 24-25, 165
mileage of 13, 15
pace of 12-15, 14t, 164-165
psychological benefits of 12-13, 15
recovery from 60, 60t
as tune-up races 29, 29t
--- PAGE 370 ---
LT (lactate threshold) 4-8, 11-13, 167-168
lunges 90, 107
Lydiard, Arthur 104
lying hamstring stretch 93
M
macrocycles 25
Magill, Pete 131
Mantz, Conner 72-73
marathon champion profiles. See also specific athletes
CJ Albertson 244-245
Michael Brandt 212-213
Matt Glynn 166-167
Roberta Groner 127-128
Sara Hall 41-42
Sifan Hassan 149-150
Eliud Kipchoge 147-148
Kate Landau 126-127
Conner Mantz 72-73
Emily Sisson 136-137
Clayton Young 72-73
marathon-pace runs 24-25, 165
marathon physiology 3-25
fat utilization and 4, 7, 12-16
genetic influences on 4, 5, 9
glycogen storage and 4, 7, 12-16
integrated training and 24-25
lactate threshold and 4-8, 11-13
maximal heart rate and 9, 13-14, 17-19, 18t, 22, 24
maximal oxygen uptake and 4, 9, 22-24
recovery time and 4, 9-10, 24
running economy and 4, 8, 16, 19, 21
slow-twitch muscle fibers and 4, 5, 8, 16
training for improvement of 4, 11-24
massage therapy 78-79
masters runners 119-131
body composition changes in 121-123
common sense and discipline 130-131
goal setting by 129-130
hydration for 124-125
individual-level factors for 119
--- PAGE 371 ---
maximal oxygen uptake in 120-121
nutrition for 122-125
rate of slowing in 120-125
recovery time for 124-125
shoes and orthotics for 128-129
stride length and 123
supplementary training for 122, 123, 125
tapering time for 135
training schedules for 125
maximal heart rate 9, 13-14, 17-19, 18t, 22, 24, 67, 121
maximal oxygen uptake (V O2max)
improvement of 22-24, 169-170
lactate threshold and 5
in marathon physiology 4, 9, 22-24
in masters runners 120-121
stroke volume and 9, 47
training adaptions for 9
medium-long runs 165
mental toughness 10, 12
mesocycles 25
Meyer, Greg 21, 157
microcycles 25
midpack runners 183-184
mileage. See also training schedules
equivalent race times 265-266
guidelines for increasing 20
of long training runs 13, 15
more than 105 miles per week 228
personal limitations 15
tapering 135, 137-140, 139t
mineral supplements 51, 62
mitochondria 5, 6, 8, 39, 44, 45, 59, 102
monotony of training 70
movement at work 68
multiple marathoning 243-262
priorities for 248
race-day strategy for 251-252
reading and following schedules for 246, 248
recovery for 243, 244, 252
training schedules for 243-244, 246, 248-262
muscle fibers 4-8, 16, 86, 91, 102, 121, 145, 146
--- PAGE 372 ---
muscle soreness 61-63, 74, 76, 78
muscle stiffness 16, 64, 81, 165
muscular system 84, 84-85f
N
Nancy Clark’s Sports Nutrition Guidebook 44
nitrate 51-52
Noakes, Tim 134
No Meat Athlete Cookbook,The (Frazier & Romine) 48
nutrition 37-55. See also carbohydrates; proteins
iron 46-50, 62
for masters runners 122-125
midrace intake 53-54, 154, 158
prerace intake 52
for race day 52-55, 154, 158
as recovery monitor 76
sodium 35, 36, 54
supplements 50-52, 62
at workplace 68
nutritional supplements 50-52, 62
O
older runners. See masters runners
omega-3 fatty acids 47, 51
organized pace groups 152
orthotics 128-129
overreaching 65, 69-71, 75-76, 80
overtraining 10, 24, 58, 65, 68-72, 75-76, 79-80, 124, 175
P
pace
altering midrace 150-152
calculation during race 156
chart for 263-264
of general aerobic runs 168
of long training runs 12-15, 14t, 164-165
marathon-pace runs 24-25, 165
of medium-long runs 165
for midpack runners 183-184
organized pace groups 152
race-day strategies 145-146, 150-152, 183-184, 198, 212, 228-229
of recovery runs 169
of tempo runs 167
--- PAGE 373 ---
pain tolerance 10
periodization 25-26
Pfitzinger, Pete 8, 21, 156-158, 247, 250
physiological attributes. See marathon physiology
Plant-Based Sports Nutrition (Larson-Meyer & Ruscigno) 48
posture 68, 115
prone plank with leg lift 101
proteins
deficiency of 62
glycogen storage and 44
intake requirements 44-46, 45t
for masters runners 122, 124-125
overconsumption of 46
supplements 50
in vegetarian/vegan diets 45-47
psychological issues
in long runs 12-13, 15
mental toughness 10, 12
on race day 150, 154
in tapering 138
push-ups 104-105
Q
quadriceps stretch 94
Quinn, Shane 136
quitting races 156, 157
R
race-day strategy 143-159
altering midrace 150-152
dropping out 156, 157
at finish line 159
first half 153-154
hydration and 52-55, 154, 159
for midpack runners 183-184
for multiple marathoning 251-252
nutrition and 52-55, 154, 158
pace and 145-146, 150-152, 183-184, 198, 212, 228-229
psychological issues and 150, 154
second half 155-159
at starting line 153
warm-ups and 143-145
--- PAGE 374 ---
racing flats 78, 153
Ratcliffe, Tom 247
rate of slowing in masters runners 120-125
recovery 57-81
adaptation process in 58-59
in back-to-back hard training days 61-66
balancing training with 58, 59
cross-training during 10, 66, 68, 113, 184-185, 198, 214, 229
double runs during 172
driving to run and 64
easy days 10, 66-68, 125
factors affecting rate of 59
genetic influences and 9, 58-60
hard/easy principle and 61-66
marathon physiology and 4, 9-10, 24
for masters runners 124-125
monitoring 75-77
for multiple marathoning 243, 244, 252
overtraining in 10, 58, 65, 68-72
real world considerations 68
techniques for enhancing 74, 77-81
time required for 28, 29, 59-61, 60t
in training schedules 184-185, 198, 214, 229, 252
recovery runs 10, 15, 19, 38, 67-68, 113-117, 131, 163-166, 168-170
recovery weeks 65-66, 133
relative energy deficiency in sport (RED-S) 71-72
resistance training. See strength training
resting heart rate 13, 18, 67, 75
Rodgers, Bill 21
Romine, Stepfanie 48
round-and-round-the-track method 55
running economy
improvement of 16, 19, 21, 78, 102, 104, 134
in marathon physiology 4, 8, 16, 19, 21
strength training and 16, 19, 102, 104
tapering and 134
running form drills 19, 21, 109-112, 141
Ruscigno, Matt 48
S
Salazar, Alberto 21
--- PAGE 375 ---
Sandoval, Tony 21
schedules. See training schedules
shoes 20, 21, 25, 78, 128-129, 146, 153-154
short repetition sessions 16, 19, 21
shoulder stretch 96
side lunges 90
side plank 100
side skips 91
side swings 89
single-leg glute bridge 100
Sisson, Emily 4, 136-137
skiing 114, 117
skip march run drill (A-skip) 111
skip march walk drill 110
sleep 10, 37, 59, 69, 71, 75-80, 124-125, 134, 155
slow-twitch muscle fibers 4, 5, 8, 16, 102, 145
Smith, Kim 136
sodium 35, 36, 54
specificity of training 24, 113, 114
speed training 16, 20, 23, 170-171
sports drinks 34, 36, 38, 44, 53, 55
squats 108-109
starting line strategy 153
static stretching 86, 91-96, 92t
step-ups 105, 123
straight-leg calf stretch 93, 123
strength training 96-109
benefits of 102
core 96-101, 97t, 140-141
frequency of 103
hill training as 104
for masters runners 122, 123
program for 102-109, 103t
running economy and 16, 19, 102, 104
tapering 140-141
stretching. See also flexibility training
dynamic 86-91, 87t
recovery and 64, 74
static 86, 91-96, 92t
stride length
core strength training and 97
--- PAGE 376 ---
flexibility training and 86, 92
in masters runners 123
running economy and 8
running form drills and 109, 110
strength training and 102
stroke volume 9, 47
supercompensation 58-61, 60t
super shoes 21, 78, 129, 146, 153-154
supplements 50-52, 62
sweat, fluid and nutrient loss through 33, 35, 46, 48, 52
swimming 114, 118
T
tapering 133-142
benefits of 134
carbohydrate loading and 38
duration of 59, 134
hard/easy efforts during 138, 138f
importance of 133
key principles for 135
mileage reduction 135, 137-140, 139t
psychological issues in 138
sample schedule 138-140, 139t
stress reduction during 142
supplementary training 140-141
visualization during 141
tempo runs
in fatigued state 65
for lactate threshold improvement 11-12, 167-168
recovery from 60, 60t
as tune-up races 29, 29t
thirst mechanism 32, 35, 125
time zone changes 155
training. See also specific types of training
back-to-back hard days 61-66
balancing recovery with 58, 59
hard/easy principle of 61-66
integrated 24-25
monotony of 70
periodized 25-26
specificity of 24, 113, 114
--- PAGE 377 ---
technology and 27, 67, 75, 77
training load 32, 48, 62, 66, 69-70, 77
training logs 69, 70
training schedules
55 miles or less per week 181-194
55 to 70 miles per week 195-207
70 to 85 miles per week 209-223
85 miles or more per week 225-242
adjustments to 177-178
following 183, 197, 211, 227, 248
hard days in 173
hill workouts in 174
interruptions in 175-176, 176t, 179
for masters runners 125
for multiple marathoning 243-244, 246, 248-262
reading 182-183, 196-197, 210-211, 226-227, 246
recovery in 184-185, 198, 214, 229, 252
training stimulus 57, 59, 61, 63, 115, 165, 169, 172, 251
train low/race high strategy 39, 43
Treacy, Ray 136, 137
triceps press 108
tune-up races
back-to-back hard days and 62
balancing hard workouts and 29, 29t
distances for 28-29
importance of 26-27
purposes of 27
recovery from 28, 29, 60, 60t
tapering and 135, 139
twice-a-day runs 171-173, 211-212, 227-228
U
urine, fluid and nutrient loss through 35, 46, 48
V
vegetarian/vegan diets 45-49, 51
visualization 141, 148
vitamin supplements 51, 62
V O2max. See maximal oxygen uptake (V O2max)
W
walking knee hugs 90
“the wall” 7, 38
--- PAGE 378 ---
warm-ups
in flexibility training 86, 87t
high-volume training and 228
lactate threshold and 11
massage therapy and 79
for masters runners 121, 131
race-day strategies 143-145, 153
running form drills and 110
in speed training 170
in strength training 103
tempo runs and 167
tune-up races and 27
water running and 116
water intake 35-37
water running 114-117
weather conditions 32-33, 35-37, 75-76, 150, 151, 176
weight. See body weight
work considerations 35, 59, 63, 68
Y
yoga 86
Young, Clayton 72-73
Z
zinc 47, 51, 62
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 379 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Pete Pfitzinger was the top American finisher in the 1984 and 1988
Olympic marathons. With a personal best of 2:11:43 in winning the 1984
U.S. Olympic Marathon Trials, he is a two-time winner of the San
Francisco Marathon and placed third in the 1987 New York City Marathon.
He was ranked the top American marathoner in 1984 by Track & Field
News, and he is a member of the Road Runners Club of America’s Hall of
Fame. Pete has more than 30 years of experience coaching marathon
runners to achieve their goals. An exercise physiologist and sports
administrator, he is also the author of Faster Road Racing. Pete and his
wife, Christine, a 1988 Olympian, live in Auckland, New Zealand.
--- PAGE 380 ---
Scott Douglas is a contributing writer for Runner’s World and Outside. He
is the author or co-author of several well-known running books, including
Personal Best Running, Running Is My Therapy, and the New York Times
bestsellers Meb for Mortals and 26 Marathons. He has also written for The
Washington Post, The Atlantic, and Slate. Scott has run more than 130,000
miles since starting as a teen. He lives in North Yarmouth, Maine.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 381 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 382 ---
A determined man is running along an asphalt road that bears evidence of recent snowfall at its
edges. He is clad in a bright blue running jacket with red and black trimmings, black athletic
pants, black gloves, and blue running shoes with black laces. The jacket is pulled back at the
hood, showing a glimmer of a blue interior. His eyes are slightly looking to his right. The
background is a winter landscape with patches of snow on the ground, bare deciduous trees,
evergreen trees, and a large snow-capped mountain in the horizon under a cloudy sky.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 383 ---
Four runners are photographed from behind running on a cement road under a cement
overpass. The closest runner to the observer is a male with a white tank top and orange and
black shorts. Standing to his left is a woman with an afro, who sports a purple tank top and blue
shorts. Later on, a woman wearing a blue long-sleeved top and black shorts is trailed by a man
wearing a light blue t-shirt and black shorts.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 384 ---
Three marathon runners are the main focus, captured in motion as they run past a refreshment
station. The runner on the left is bald and wearing a purple and blue singlet and black shorts.
The runner in the middle has short brown hair and is wearing a white singlet and black shorts.
The runner on the right has dark hair and a beard, wearing a black and red shirt, grey shorts,
and has a race bib pinned to his chest. In the foreground, numerous green cups, likely filled
with water or energy drinks, are neatly arranged on a table, ready for the runners. Behind the
runners and the refreshment station, spectators line the street, and orange banners with white
lettering are visible.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 385 ---
A close-up shows the intent concentration of a marathon runner, a dark-haired woman wearing
her hair in a ponytail, as she stretches out to take a cup of liquid from a volunteer at a race aid
station. She is dressed in a blue athletic singlet with “SPRING WHIPPETS” written in yellow,
and a race bib 76. Her arms are stretched out, indicating the strain of the race. A few volunteers
in bright yellow jackets offer cups to the runners. In the blurry background, two male runners
are seen taking drinks from similar cups, one wearing a light green tank top and one wearing a
blue Nike t-shirt. In the distance behind, crowds and white tents line the course of the race,
indicating a heavily attended event on a sunny day.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 386 ---
A woman with her hair pulled back is fleeing from the viewer on a road of asphalt. She has on
a bright orange tank top, dark leggings, and pink running shoes. Her arms are flexed at the
elbows, and her hands are relaxed. The road in front of her curves to the right slightly. The
backdrop includes a rolling hill with sparse foliage and a serpentine dirt road on one of the
hills. Scattered trees and bushes line the edge of the road upon which the woman is running.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 387 ---
Two men marathon runners, Conner Mantz and Clayton Young, are presented winning, arms
up. Mantz, left, is dressed in a white tank top, blue shorts, and sunglasses, with a bib number
on. Young, right, is dressed in a red tank top, black shorts, and sunglasses, with a bib. Both are
fair-complexioned and look as if smiling. In the blurred background, there are spectators and
banners present, implying a race finishing line. Text on the left gives their biographies, their
fastest marathon times, and 2024 U.S. Olympic Trials and Olympics highlights.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 388 ---
A curly brown-haired young woman with her hair pulled up is doing a plank on a purple
exercise mat in a brightly lit room. She has on a light blue exercise top and matching bottoms.
Her forearms rest on the mat, and her body is in a straight line from head to heels, supported by
her toes. Her eye is slightly to her right, indicating concentration and effort. There is a wooden
floor in the background, a red chair, a bookcase containing sundry items, and framed paintings
leaning against the wall, implying a domestic setting.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 389 ---
A diagram shows the muscles of the human body. The visible muscles are the Brachialis
muscle, Deltoid, Pectoralis major, Serratus anterior, Rectus abdominis, Obliques, Transverse
abdominis, Iliopsoas, Adductor longus, Gracilis, Sartorius, Quadriceps muscles (Rectus
femoris, Vastus lateralis, and Vastus medialis), and Tibialis anterior. The caption requests that
the diagram be used as a guide in identifying the muscles exercised during stretches and
exercise.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 390 ---
An anatomical diagram shows the posterior view of the human muscular system on the right-
hand side and skeletal system on the left-hand side. The muscles are outlined with lines
indicating each respective location. The terminology used for labeling the muscles is as
follows: Trapezius, Infraspinatus, Teres major, Triceps, Latissimus dorsi, Gluteus medius,
Gluteus maximus, Hamstrings (which consists of Semitendinosus, Biceps femoris, and
Semimembranosus), Gastrocnemius, and Soleus. The bony structure reveals the spine, ribs,
pelvis, scapula, humerus, radius, ulna, femur, tibia, fibula, and hand and foot bones. The head
is also revealed half way through, revealing the skull.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 391 ---
The photograph is of a man doing the cat-cow exercise. The photograph is in two sections,
marked 'a' and 'b'. In photograph 'a', the man is on his hands and knees, his back arched and his
head raised. In photograph 'b', the man has curved his back, his chin brought towards his chest.
The caption next to the photo explains the exercise as enhancing flexibility of the hips, spine,
shoulders, and neck. The directions are to position hands and knees, inhale and arch back,
exhale, lower head, and round back.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 392 ---
The photograph illustrates two phases of a leg swing exercise, designated 'a' and 'b'. In both
phases, a brown-haired woman with ponytailed hair stands in front of a light gray wall with her
right hand lightly resting on it to balance. She has a black tank top on along with striped gray
and black shorts and black running shoes.
In picture 'a', she straightens her right leg straight forward parallel to the ground. Her left leg is
fixed on the ground.
In photo 'b', her right leg is swung back, partially bent at the knee. Her left leg is firmly
planted.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 393 ---
The photo depicts two phases of a side swing exercise, marked as 'a' and 'b'. A brown-haired
woman with her hair pulled back stands sideways against a light gray wall, balancing with her
hands. She has on a black tank top covered with a mesh overlay and orange stripes, patterned
gray and black shorts, and black athletic shoes with white soles.
In photo 'a', she has extended her right leg straight out to the side, parallel to the ground. Her
left leg is firmly on the floor.
In photo 'b', her right leg is swung back and partially across her body, bending at the knee. Her
left leg is stationary.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 394 ---
A young male with dark short hair and glasses is depicted in the middle of a side lunge
movement. He has on a red short-sleeved top and black shorts. His left leg is lying straight out
to the side with his foot flat on a blue exercise mat, while his right knee is bent at about a 90-
degree angle, straddling over his right foot. His fingers are folded together on his chest. He is
staring straight into the camera. The scene is a simple light gray wall.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 395 ---
A man with curly dark hair and glasses is standing on his left leg, with his right knee brought
up to his chest using both hands. He is wearing a red t-shirt, black shorts, and blue and yellow
athletic shoes. His eyes are directed slightly upward and to the right. The man is standing on a
black exercise mat, and the background is a light gray plain wall.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 396 ---
The photo depicts two phases, 'a' and 'b', of the jumping jack exercise. The woman has brown
hair pulled back and is wearing a black tank top and plaid gray and black shorts and black
athletic shoes. She is standing in front of a plain gray background and performing an exercise.
In photo 'a', she is standing in the initial position with her legs apart and her arms crossed over
her waist.
In photo 'b', she is jumping with legs further apart and arms above her head in the shape of a V.
Her feet are no longer on the ground.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 397 ---
A young man with dark curly hair and glasses is doing a calf stretch against a light gray wall.
He has an orange short-sleeved shirt, black shorts, and blue and yellow athletic shoes. His
palms are flat against the wall at shoulder height, and his right leg is bent at the knee and
brought forward. His left leg is stretched straight back with the heel sunk deeply into the
ground, creating a stretch upon the calf muscle. He is facing the wall. He stands on a black
floor that is slightly shiny.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 398 ---
A young dark-haired male wearing glasses is standing calf stretching against a light gray wall.
He has an orange short-sleeved shirt, black shorts, and yellow and blue athletic shoes. His
hands are flat on the wall at about chest level, and his two legs are out behind him. His front
leg is slightly bent at the knee, and his back leg is straight with the heel pushed strongly into
the ground to experience the stretch in the calf. He is facing towards the wall. He is on a black
floor.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 399 ---
A woman is reclining on her back on a blue exercise mat, stretching her hamstrings. Her left
leg is stretched straight up in the air, with a purple resistance band tied around the sole of her
white and gray athletic shoe. She has the ends of the band held by both hands to maximize the
stretch. Her right leg is stretched straight out on the mat. She is dressed in a light purple short-
sleeved top and black leggings. Her head is on the mat, and she is gazing at her raised leg. The
background is an unfussy light gray wall.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 400 ---
A young guy with dark curly hair and glasses stands next to a light gray wall performing a
quadriceps stretch using the wall as support. He wears an orange short-sleeved top, black
shorts, and blue and yellow athletic shoes. His left hand rests flat against the wall near waist
level. His right thigh is flexed behind him, and he is grasping his right foot with his right hand,
pulling it toward his buttocks to stretch the front of his thigh. He is facing forward. He is
standing on a black surface.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 401 ---
A brown-haired woman with her hair pulled back in a low ponytail is in a position of kneeling
hip flexor stretch. She has her right leg bent at the knee and in front of her with her foot flat on
a blue exercise mat. Her left knee is behind her on the mat, and her left foot is stretched out
behind her with the top of her foot on the mat. She is wearing a light purple long-sleeved
athletic top and black leggings, and white and gray athletic shoes. She has her hands on her
hips, and she is looking forward with a neutral face expression. The background is a light gray
wall over a black floor.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 402 ---
A long brown-haired woman is reclined on her back on a blue exercise mat doing a glute
stretch. Her left leg is flexed at the knee with her foot placed flat on the mat. Her right leg is
flexed, and her right ankle is crossed over her left knee. Her left thigh is gently pulled towards
her chest as her hands are clasped over it, stretching her right glute further. She is wearing a
black tank top and gray and black striped shorts, with black athletic shoes. Her head is on the
mat, and she is looking upward. The background of the image is a light gray wall over a black
floor.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 403 ---
A young man lies on his back on a blue exercise mat doing a hip rotator stretch. His arms are
held out to the sides, lying on the black floor. His left leg is stretched straight out on the mat.
His right leg is bent at the knee and crossed over his body, with his right foot lying on the floor
close to his left knee. He is facing toward the left. He has on a red t-shirt, black shorts, and
yellow and blue athletics shoes.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 404 ---
A young man is on his hands and knees on a blue exercise mat, doing a bird-dog exercise. His
right arm is out straight in front of him, parallel to the ground, and his left leg is extended
straight behind him, parallel to the ground. His torso is fairly straight, and his eyes are
downcast at the mat. He is dressed in an orange short-sleeved shirt, black shorts, and blue and
yellow athletic shoes. The background is a plain light-gray wall over a black floor.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 405 ---
Two phases, 'a' and 'b', of an exercise lowering the leg are indicated in the picture. The exercise
may be appropriate for a postpartum woman. A woman lies on her back on a blue exercise mat.
She has on a light purple short-sleeved athletic shirt, black leg coverings, and white and gray
athletic footwear. Her arms are at her sides. The backdrop is a light gray wall with a black floor
below.
In figure 'a', knees are bent to about a 90-degree angle, with lower legs lifted off the mat,
parallel to the ceiling.
In figure 'b', she has gradually extended her left leg so that it is outstretched straight and
suspended just above the mat, with her right leg bent at a 90-degree angle and her lower leg
raised.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 406 ---
The photograph displays two phases, marked 'a' and 'b', of a side plank exercise.
In photo 'a', a young man with dark curly hair and glasses is reclining on his side on a blue
exercise mat, resting on his right forearm and the side of his right knee. His right hand is on his
hip. He has on a red short-sleeved top and black shorts.
In figure 'b', the man is in the same stance, but with his right leg out straight and supporting
himself on the side of his foot.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 407 ---
A dark-haired young man wearing glasses is reclining on his back on a blue exercise mat doing
a bicycle crunch. His left leg is stretched straight out, lightly above the mat, and his right knee
is bent and brought toward his stomach. His left elbow is approaching his right knee, and his
right hand is at the back of his head. He has a red short-sleeved shirt, black shorts, and yellow
and blue athletic shoes. His eyes are focused on his bent knee. The wall behind is light gray
above a black floor.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 408 ---
The photo shows two phases, 'a' and 'b', of a variation of a plank exercise. A curly dark-haired
young man wearing glasses is doing exercise on a blue exercise mat in front of a light gray wall
over a black floor. He is wearing a red short-sleeved top, black shorts, and yellow and blue
athletics shoes.
In photo 'a', he is in a standard forearm plank position. His body is in a straight line from head
to heels, with his forearms and toes as support. His eyes are lowered toward the mat.
In photo 'b', he is in the same forearm plank position, but his left leg is straight up in the air. His
body is still relatively straight, supported by his forearms, right foot, and toes.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 409 ---
Two images demonstrating a push-up exercise on a blue mat. The first image (a) shows a
woman in the starting push-up position, with arms straight and body aligned from head to
heels. The second image (b) shows the woman lowering her body toward the mat, bending her
elbows at a 90-degree angle, while maintaining a straight posture.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 410 ---
The image shows two stages, labeled 'a' and 'b', of a step-up exercise. A young man with
glasses is performing exercise. He is wearing a red short-sleeved shirt, black shorts, and blue
and yellow athletic shoes. In image 'a', he is stepping onto a red and black step stool with his
right leg, while his left leg is extended behind him. In image 'b', he is standing on the stool with
his left leg, and his right leg is raised with his knee bent.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 411 ---
The image shows two stages, labeled 'a' and 'b', of a hip hike exercise. A young man with curly
dark hair and glasses is viewed from the back, standing on a teal and black aerobic step. He is
wearing a red short-sleeved shirt, black shorts, and blue and yellow athletic shoes. In image 'a',
he is standing with both feet flat on the step, maintaining a level pelvis. In image 'b', he has
lowered his left hip slightly by letting his left foot hang off the side of the step, while keeping
his right leg straight and supporting his weight. This demonstrates the downward movement of
the left hip in a hip hike.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 412 ---
The photo features two phases, 'a' and 'b', of a bench dip exercise. A brown-haired woman with
her brown hair pulled back in a low ponytail performs the exercise on a black exercise bench.
She wears a light purple long-sleeved athletic top, black leggings, and white and gray athletic
shoes. The background is a blank light gray wall over a black floor.
In photo 'a', she is in the initial position, seated on the bench's edge with legs outstretched
forward and her hands holding the edge of the bench at her back, arms straight.
In picture 'b', she has bent her elbows to lower her body, with her back near the bench. Her hips
are brought low down to the floor.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 413 ---
The photograph captures two phases, 'a' and 'b', of a dumbbell lunge exercise. The young adult
male with curly dark hair and glasses is dressed in a red short-sleeved top, black shorts, and
blue and yellow sports shoes. He holds one dumbbell in each hand. Behind him is a light gray
plain wall on top of a black surface.
In photo 'a', he stands in the initial position, with his feet shoulder-width apart and standing
straight up, with his dumbbells at his sides.
In photo 'b', he has advanced his right leg and brought his hips down so that both knees are bent
at about 90-degree angles. His front knee is directly over his ankle, and his back knee is just
above the ground. He still has the dumbbells grasped by his sides.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 414 ---
The photo depicts two phases, 'a' and 'b', of a seated overhead triceps press. A brown-haired
woman with her hair back in a ponytail sits on a black exercise bench. She has on a light purple
short-sleeved athletic top, black leggings, and white and gray athletic shoes. She holds one
dumbbell in both hands. In the background is a plain light gray wall over a black floor.
In photo 'a', she is in the initial position with her arms extended fully overhead, with the
dumbbell held vertically above her head.
In photo 'b', she has dropped the dumbbell behind her head by bending her elbows, holding her
upper arms fixed.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 415 ---
The picture depicts two phases, 'a' and 'b', of a goblet squat. The woman is brown-haired, with
her hair tied back in a ponytail. She holds a dumbbell vertically in front of her chest using both
hands. She has on a black tank top with mesh panels, printed gray and black shorts, and black
sports shoes. The background is a simple light gray wall above a dark floor.
In photograph 'a', she stands in the initial posture, upright with shoulder-width stance of feet
and dumbbell grasped against the chest.
In photograph 'b', she has dropped her hips as if sitting back into a seat, with her back straight
and her chest lifted. Her elbows are facing downward below her knees.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 416 ---
A ponytailed woman with brown hair is viewed in profile showing a high knee running stance.
Her left leg is bent at the knee and lifted high to her chest, with her foot being flexed. Her right
leg is straight and bearing weight, with her foot planted on the ground. Her right arm is bent at
the elbow and raised, and her left arm is bent and moving backward. She is in a black tank top
that has mesh panels, gray and black print shorts, and black athletic sneakers that have white
accents and yellow socks. She is caught in mid-stride. The background is a light gray wall with
no decorating on it above a dark floor.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 417 ---
A brown-haired woman with her hair pulled back into a ponytail is photographed mid-air in a
running motion with a high knee. Her left knee is bent and brought up high to her chest. Her
right leg is straight down with her foot hovering just off the ground. Her right arm is brought
back and extended forward, and her left arm is brought back and extending backwards. She has
a black tank top with mesh panels, striped gray and black shorts, and yellow socks on black
athletic shoes. Her eyes are looking forward, and her face indicates effort. The background is a
light gray plain wall over a dark floor.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 418 ---
The photo illustrates two phases, 'a' and 'b', of a kickout exercise or a B-skip. A female subject
with a brown ponytail is illustrated in profile position. She is dressed in a black tank top with
mesh insertions, streaked gray and black shorts, and black sports shoes with yellow socks. The
light gray plain wall is in the background above a dark floor.
She stands on her right leg in photograph 'a' with her left knee bent and lifted as high up into
her chest as possible. Her right arm is bent and in front of her, and her left arm is bent and
trailing behind her.
In photo 'b', she is halfway through a movement, stretching her left leg straight out to the front
with a slight upward slope. Her right leg is bent slightly and bearing her weight. Her arms are
opposite from where they were in photo 'a', with her right arm coming forward and her left arm
swinging in the opposite direction.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 419 ---
A middle-aged Asian man is stretching outside by a body of water during sunrise or sunset. He
has on a black t-shirt, black shorts, a black baseball cap, glasses, and orange running shoes. His
right leg is bent at the knee with his foot flat on the pavement, and his left leg is straight behind
him. His hands are together, resting on his right thigh. He is looking aside with a concentrated
face. The background is a mottled landscape with trees, a body of water with a railing, and a
bright warm sunlight coming through the scene.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 420 ---
Female marathon runner Kate Landau is depicted triumphantly crossing the finish line, arms
held aloft in victory. She wears a green and black singlet for racing, black shorts, and a
hydration pack. Blue and white “LIFETIME” streamers denote the finish line of the “HEART
MARATHON”. Viewers and event support structures are in the distance, blurred in the
background. At the left, text gives biographical details of Kate Landau, such as her marathon
personal record (2:31:56, Boston, 2019) and summaries of her marathon victories.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 421 ---
A triumphant female marathon athlete, Roberta Groner, is shown running across a finish line
with raised arms. She has on a blue and white running singlet with “QNB GRONER DOHA
2019” legible, dark blue shorts, a white headband, and green and black running shoes. Her face
is one of joy. In the out-of-focus background, onlookers and banners are seen, indicating a race
event. To the left is text giving biographical data for Roberta Groner, such as her best marathon
time (2:29:09 in Rotterdam, 2019) and a highlight of sixth place at the 2019 World
Championship.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 422 ---
Focused marathon runner, Emily Sisson, is caught in action as she runs a race. She has on a
white and pink running singlet that reads “SISSON” and the bib number, along with black
shorts with a geometric design. She also has on a white visor and a watch on her left wrist. Her
eyes are directed to the front and her body is leaning to the right. The background is out of
focus, implying speed and the presence of spectators or other runners. On the left, text gives
biographical data about Emily Sisson, including her best marathon time (2:18:29 at the 2022
Chicago Marathon) and emphasis on her achievements, for example, second place in the 2022
Chicago Marathon and the 2024 U.S. Olympic Trials.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 423 ---
A bar graph titled “Hard/easy efforts during marathon taper” illustrates the concept of marathon
tapering with the right balance of hard efforts and recovery. The horizontal axis represents the
“Days until marathon,” ranging from 21 days to 1 day before the race. The vertical axis
represents “Effort,” scaled from 0 to 120. Each blue bar indicates the level of effort for a
particular day in the tapering period. The graph shows a general trend of decreasing effort as
the marathon approaches, with occasional spikes representing harder workouts followed by
periods of lower effort for recovery. For example, there is a high effort level around 21 days
out, followed by lower effort, then another significant effort around 15 days out, and
subsequent lower and fluctuating effort levels leading up to the final day.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 424 ---
A smiling man running a marathon, Eliud Kipchoge, is caught in action running a race. He is in
a red and black striped racing singlet featuring “KENYA” and “KIPCHOGE” in bold lettering,
black running shorts with a white emblem, and white running shoes with black trim. His arms
are slightly extended, and his eyes are straight ahead. The background is blurred, with
spectators along the street. To the left, text gives biographical details of Eliud Kipchoge,
including his personal best marathon time (2:01:09 in Berlin, 2022) and a plethora of career
highlights, such as being an Olympic champion in the 2016 and 2021 Olympics and a world
record holder in 2018 and 2022.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 425 ---
A victorious women's marathon athlete, Sifan Hassan, is pictured in celebration of a win. She
wears an orange running singlet with “Nederland” and “HASSAN” readable, a black headband,
and what seems to be a race bib. Her arms are up and fists clenched in triumph, and her mouth
is open in a yell of triumph. The background is out of focus, implying a race finish line with a
light-colored background. On the left, text gives Sifan Hassan's biographical information,
including her personal best marathon time (2:13:24 in Chicago, 2023) and achievements in
bold, such as that she won the 2024 Olympics, the 2023 Chicago Marathon, and the 2023
London Marathon.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 426 ---
A man marathon runner, Matt Glynn, is in action running in a race. He is dressed in a white
tank top with the race number “2465” affixed to it, black running shorts, black compression
socks, and orange running shoes. In addition, he has a blue headband and a watch on his left
arm. His arms are slightly bent at the elbows and look intense as if concentrating on the race.
The background is a slightly faded suburban street scene with parked automobiles and trees.
On the left-hand side, text offers biographical data concerning Matt Glynn, including his
personal best marathon time (2:30:43 at Twin Cities in 2004) and some background about his
running career.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 427 ---
Male marathon participant Michael Brandt is clearly visible in the center of the frame, with a
determined look on his face as he runs. He wears a white tank top and has the race bib “A
20087” visible, dark-colored shorts, a red hat, and sunglasses. He also wears a watch on his left
wrist. Behind him, other runners are blurrier, which shows they too are in motion. The
background depicts a city street lined with onlookers and buildings and hints an urban
marathon scene. There is text to the left that gives biographical details of Michael Brandt,
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 428 ---
The photograph is of a busy marathon taking place on an asphalt road. Numerous runners are
running, backing away from the observer. Spectators line each side of the road. There are
banners and race markers lining the course. The runners at the front are sharper in focus, and
the runners towards the back are blurrier. One of the runners in the foreground sports a white
tank top with '603' and 'Vandk' legible on it. One of the runners sports a white tank top with
'529' written on it. A person in a blue vest and carrying a backpack is distributing water or
energy gels to the runners.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 429 ---
A male marathon runner, CJ Albertson, runs in action while in competition. He is wearing a
yellow and pink-colored racing singlet with “BROOKS” readable, and a race bib with
“ALBERTSON” written on it. He also wears a white band on his head and a watch on his left
wrist. He has a determined-looking expression. The background is out of focus, implying a race
scene complete with spectators and other runners. To the left is biographical data about CJ
Albertson, including his best marathon time (2:08:17 in Chicago, 2024) as well as top marks in
his accomplishments, including first place in the 2023 California International Marathon and
being the leading American in the 2024 Boston Marathon.
Return to text
OceanofPDF.com