
--- PAGE 4 ---
Copyright © 2014 by Luke Humphrey
All rights reserved. Published in the United States of America by VeloPress, a division of Competitor
Group, Inc.
3002 Sterling Circle, Suite 100
Boulder, Colorado 80301-2338 USA
(303) 440-0601 · Fax (303) 444-6788 · E-mail velopress@competitorgroup.com
Distributed in the United States and Canada by Ingram Publisher Services
The Library of Congress has cataloged the printed edition as follows:
Humphrey, Luke, 1981–
Hansons half-marathon method : run your best half-marathon the Hansons way / Luke Humphrey,
with Keith and Kevin Hanson.
pages cm
Includes index.
ISBN 978-1-937715-19-9 (pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN 978-1-937716-53-0 (e-book)
1. Long-distance running—Training. I. Hanson, Keith. II. Hanson, Kevin. III. Title.
GV1065.H77 2014
796.42'5—dc23
2013050470
For information on purchasing VeloPress books, please call (800) 811-4210, ext. 2138, or visit
www.velopress.com.
Cover design by Ozzie Thoreson
Interior design by Vicki Hopewell
Composition by Jessica Xavier
Illustrations by Visual Health Information and Nicole Kaufman
Tables 8.1 and A.2 adapted with permission from Monique Ryan, Sports Nutrition for Endurance
Athletes, 3rd ed. (Boulder, CO: VeloPress, 2012).
Version 3.1
--- PAGE 5 ---
A note to readers: Double-tap on illustrations and tables to enlarge them.
After art is selected, you may expand or pinch your fingers to zoom in and
out.
--- PAGE 6 ---
Contents
Foreword
Acknowledgments
Introduction
the approach PART I
1 // Hansons training philosophy
2 // Marathon physiology
the program PART II
3 // Training program components
4 // Hansons training plans
5 // Program modifications
the strategy PART III
6 // Selecting race goals
7 // Supplemental training
8 // Nutrition and hydration
9 // Gearing up
10 // Race tactics
11 // Post-race recovery
Appendix A: The Elite Program: Hansons-Brooks Distance Project
Appendix B: Sweat loss calculator
Index
--- PAGE 7 ---
About the authors
--- PAGE 8 ---
Foreword
Congratulations! In your hands you have the ultimate guide to adventure.
Sure, it’s also a guide to your best half-marathon yet, and the following
pages will give you the training plans, graphs, numbers, and science you
need to get to your goals. But it is so much more than that. While I can’t be
sure that you’ll run your fastest—that part is up to you—I can tell you that
your adventure begins as soon as you lace up your running shoes. In this
book you are the captain of your own adventure; you decide where, when,
and how far you wish to go.
In your hands you also have the ultimate self-help book. Thumb through
the pages and you may not see exercises on self-esteem building or the keys
to happiness. But I dare you to head out the door, log some miles, and not
feel like you made you a better you. Just try and go for a run and not let
your mind wander to those places that haven’t gotten the proper attention.
You’ll likely find that every mile and every workout is a perfect opportunity
to spend some time on yourself, and I suspect you will learn a lot about you
in the process.
I’ve been fortunate enough to get to run all over the United States, as
well as in Japan, Europe, and the Middle East; it’s been an amazing
adventure. But the truth is that some of the best runs I have taken involved
getting lost just a few miles from home and stumbling upon that hidden
coffee shop—the one I’d never see from the main road—or getting lost in a
conversation during a run and forgetting it’s 34 degrees and raining. I’ve
run races that people said “awed” them, and yet I’ve discovered the most
gratifying running moments when nobody was watching. Yes, I’d be the
first to admit that there’s something incredibly painful about heading out for
a 5:00 a.m. run, but when you crest that final hill and see an amazing
sunrise, it is all worthwhile. You earned a sunrise that the sleepy world is
missing out on. And there is something therapeutic about losing track of
--- PAGE 9 ---
your pace while sorting through a day’s problems. Or, better yet, forgetting
your problems by getting caught up in your pace.
So, yes, congratulations! You’ve stumbled upon the ultimate adventure
and maybe the key to happiness; all it requires is for you to get out the front
door and make it happen. I wish you the best of luck meeting all of your
running goals and running your fastest half-marathon ever. I can’t promise
you will hit every goal, but I can promise you this: the journey along the
way will be worth it.
So as you chase your goals, remember to enjoy the journey because the
process of becoming a faster you is often far more satisfying than just being
a faster you.
—DESIREE LINDEN
2012 U.S. Olympic marathoner
--- PAGE 10 ---
Acknowledgments
I owe the world to Kevin and Keith Hanson for giving me the reins on this
project and letting me make it my own. I have learned much of what I know
from their talent, dedication, and coaching. To talk with them not only
about the “what” and “how” of their programs but also the “why” is like
being able to open an encyclopedia and find the answer to almost any
training question imaginable.
I must also thank Casey Blaine at VeloPress for her passion for this
project—and for never getting too mad at me for missing a deadline. She
enthusiastically tweaked the manuscript into a comprehensible form,
making sure that the idea I was trying to convey was never lost.
Since the release of our first book, Hansons Marathon Method, my
coaching business has expanded beyond my wildest dreams. In fact, it grew
so quickly, I was blindsided a bit and we had to scramble to ensure our
quality wasn’t lost in the growth. For that, I thank Corey Kubatzky, my
director of operations, who ended up doing a lot of small, thankless projects
so I could continue to coach, write, and keep my sanity.
Last but not least, I am so grateful to my wife for supporting me through
this task of writing a book. There were lots of late nights reading and
writing material for this book. My daughter, Josephine, also deserves some
credit for helping daddy type, because, well, she likes technology. Big
thanks to my girls.
--- PAGE 11 ---
Introduction
In 1999, brothers Kevin and Keith Hanson were successful coaches and
running-store owners in the Detroit metropolitan area. But they had a vision
—to change the course of American distance running—and with the help of
Brooks Sports started the Hansons-Brooks Distance Project, an Olympic
training program for postcollegiate athletes. Fifteen years later, the program
has a voice and presence at the most elite level of the sport, producing
Olympians and World Championship qualifiers at the half- and full
marathon distances.
Over the years, the brothers showed that they can train world-class
runners, but around Michigan, they have always been best known for
helping everyday runners to achieve their best performances. That’s where I
(Luke) fit in. In 2004, I joined the program as a fairly decent young runner
but have since matured into a two-time Olympic Trials qualifier and sub-
1:04:00 half-marathoner with Kevin and Keith as my mentors. Aside from
being able to run pretty far at a solid pace, I also have a master’s degree in
exercise science and began teaching the Hansons Method to our running
groups in 2006. As the elite program gained success, this renegade training
approach began attracting more and more attention. People started asking
questions, wanting to know more, and magazine articles, although they
were terrific for exposure, couldn’t provide the full picture. In 2012, we
were given an avenue to provide the world with the comprehensive
knowledge of the Hansons Method for the marathon.
When our first book, Hansons Marathon Method, was released, the
response was wonderful; almost immediately, however, people were asking,
“How do I adapt this for a half-marathon?” This perhaps is not a surprising
question if you look at the numbers. According to Running USA, each year,
the half-marathon has hundreds of thousands more participants than the
marathon. In 2012, the number of half-marathon finishers totaled about 1.85
--- PAGE 12 ---
million, compared with about 487,000 in the marathon. And that number is
only growing.
The bottom line is that there are a lot more people lacing up for a 13.1-
mile race. Most half-marathoners fall into one of these four general
categories:
VETERAN RUNNERS // These runners have logged plenty of
miles over the years and have probably run several half-marathons
in the past. They are looking to take their previous half-marathon
performances to the next level. They have probably run at least one
marathon in the past, as well. This is a pretty competitive group.
RECREATIONAL RUNNERS // While members of this group are
new to the half-marathon distance, they are not running newbies,
having completed a number of shorter races. This group is looking
to establish a half-marathon baseline, usually with plans to run
another half-marathon in the future and probably to move up to the
next level after running the half-marathon.
NOVICE RUNNERS // The novice group includes newer runners
looking to knock “13.1” off their bucket list, as well as those
running for charity groups. Many of these runners will leave half-
marathoning behind once they finish the race. The novice group is
prevalent in the half-marathon world, due in part to the robust
charity scene. I have many clients who run a race for a loved one
while representing that person’s cause, and it is often more realistic
for them to commit to a half-marathon distance than to the full
marathon.
BEGINNING RUNNERS // This group includes a large contingent
of charity runners, as well as people who decide to do a race as a
way to begin a fitness program. While I certainly would not advise
complete beginners to take on a full marathon as their first race, the
half-marathon distance is much more readily achievable, with less
potential for injury. Out of this group, some will continue to run,
--- PAGE 13 ---
moving into another group, and some will abandon the sport
following their race.
When we discussed training for a full marathon, we talked about
newbies being convinced that they can have it all and not sacrifice any of
their free time—or their toenails! For many, that time commitment is
probably a pretty big turnoff for the marathon, especially when you are
training through summer barbecues and days on the beach, but we never
wanted to make you feel that you were about to embark on a walk in the
park. Well, when we cut the distance in half, the training doesn’t have to be
such a commitment, and that probably holds a strong appeal for about 1.8
million people in the United States.
With all of this said, make no bones about it: The Hansons Method is
still focused on helping you run the best you can. So, while you may not be
cursing us during the middle of a tempo run, you may still grumble under
your breath.
A training plan with minimal mileage and three running days per week
can be a great way to ease into the sport and build a foundation without
getting injured; once the decision is made to make the leap to the marathon,
however, it simply isn’t enough. For the half-marathon, it may be less
detrimental, but it still may not provide you with everything you need to be
prepared for the race. Although these plans usually assist runners in
reaching their main goal, which is to finish, the by-product is often a dislike
of the sport. Because the greatest predictor of adherence to any type of
exercise is enjoyment, this certainly isn’t a recipe for long-term success in
running.
By charting a course for a successful and enjoyable half-marathon
experience, the Hansons Method seeks to encourage the crossing of
multiple finish lines of multiple race distances. Training should always
allow you to transition to different race distances without a major change in
overall training philosophy. Unlike a number of the other popular training
plans out there, our approach will transform you into not only a finisher but
a longtime competitor. We take a straight-talk approach when it comes to
teaching you about half-marathon training; we won’t sugarcoat, offer any
supposed shortcuts, or treat you with condescension. Indeed, running itself
--- PAGE 14 ---
wouldn’t be a big deal if it didn’t require a little blood, a lot of sweat, and
perhaps a few tears.
--- PAGE 16 ---
1
Hansons training philosophy
THIS CHAPTER TAKES A close look at the philosophies that lay the
groundwork for the Hansons Half-Marathon Method. You may think that
understanding our philosophy is optional, but I strongly encourage you to
take time to read this section. Studies show that we are far more likely to
adopt and embrace new habits and behaviors if we understand why we are
doing something.
The building blocks of this program rest on the teachings of famed
coach Arthur Lydiard. Widely credited with popularizing the sport of
running, Lydiard led a long line of runners to realize their Olympic dreams.
As a result, his ideas about training had a major influence on the
development of our methods. As taught by Lydiard, the idea of cumulative
fatigue serves as an underlying foundation of all of our training plans.
Cumulative fatigue comes from a slow buildup (but not to the point of
overtraining) of fatigue via the days, weeks, and months of consistent
training. In other words, cumulative fatigue results from repetitive training
that doesn’t allow for full recovery between training days. It emphasizes a
concerted, strategic approach to half-marathon training rather than a
number of disparate training days strung together at random. The
fundamental principle of cumulative fatigue runs throughout the Hansons
Half-Marathon Method and consists of five components:
// mileage
// intensity
// balance
// consistency
// active recovery
--- PAGE 17 ---
If you omit one component of the cumulative fatigue philosophy, you
interfere with the others, creating a domino effect that limits the
physiological adaptations necessary for successful half-marathoning.
Mileage: Strategic weekly volume
The biggest problem with many half-marathon training plans is that they are
tailored to fit what the average runner wants, not what he or she needs.
These programs usually place a majority of the weekly mileage on Saturday
and Sunday, when runners have the most time available. Roughly the same
amount of mileage is then spread over a few days of the workweek. This
can mean that all the prescribed weekday runs are higher-intensity
workouts, leaving few opportunities for easy runs and the accumulation of
important training mileage. Since the weekday runs in those plans are
mostly high-intensity, it takes a runner longer to recover, causing the easier
runs to fall by the wayside. Even if these plans did specify running on the
interim days, runners would likely be too tired from the previous workouts.
Adequate weekly mileage plays an important role in the cumulative
fatigue process. Increasing mileage comes along with increasing training
from 3–4 days a week to 6 days a week. This doesn’t necessarily mean
adding intensity but rather more easy mileage. The Hansons Half-Marathon
Method shows you how to add that mileage while controlling your pace to
avoid overworking yourself. Consider the fact that runners training for a 5K
will put in four to six times their actual race distance in mileage each week
(see Table 1.1). Although the average half-marathoner won’t put in four to
five times the half-marathon distance on a weekly basis (50–65 miles), it is
reasonable to run roughly three times the distance per week (35–45 miles).
--- PAGE 18 ---
Although runners preparing for the half-marathon realize that they will
need to run more mileage than they would need to for the 5K, it can be a bit
intimidating to look at some of these totals. Runners, especially newer ones,
will look a few months ahead and doubt that they will be able to handle the
training. What those runners lack is confidence. We tell runners to start at
the ridiculous, or what they think is completely beyond their capabilities,
and work backward until they reach a point that is both mentally and
physically manageable. While 35–45 miles per week may sound ridiculous
on day one, focusing on what you have to do in the present is key. You will
be surprised by what you are able to handle a few months down the line.
Again and again we have seen that athletes who give their bodies
adequate time to adapt to new training stresses are able to tolerate much
more than they ever imagined to be feasible. Our program works to take
you up the mileage ladder one rung at a time, starting with lower mileage
and gradually increasing both mileage and intensity. As I like to say to our
athletes, “If you want to build a house, you must first create a structure to
hold it up.” The volume of mileage builds a foundation that allows all the
other variables to work.
Intensity: Physiological adaptations
--- PAGE 19 ---
In addition to an appropriate amount of total weekly mileage, our plans
stand apart from the rest in terms of pace and intensity. These factors are
inextricably linked because if workouts are overly difficult, you’re going to
be too tired to reach your weekly mileage quotas. In the Hansons-Brooks
Distance Project, the competition can be fierce among our elite athletes.
Teaching proper pacing is perhaps our biggest struggle with runners. During
workouts, Kevin and Keith always seem to know when an athlete has
developed an “I know you’re fast, but I’m just a little bit faster” mentality
toward another runner. As a means of emphasizing the importance of pace
and punishing runners who run faster than they are instructed to, they dole
out push-ups for every second someone is too fast. After a few penalty
push-ups, the athlete inevitably pulls back on the reins and falls into step.
While we won’t make you do push-ups when you falter in your pacing,
pacing does remain an important component of cumulative fatigue. The
majority of our suggested mileage is run at anaerobic threshold (lactate
threshold) pace or slower. You may wonder, “How am I supposed to get
faster if I’m running slower?” In the next chapter, we will explain the many
beneficial adaptations that come with endurance training, such as
mitochondria development, muscle fiber adaptations, and the ability to burn
fat as fuel. Exercise physiologists have discovered that these adaptations are
best elicited through a pace that is slower than anaerobic threshold pace.
This improves your running by pushing the aerobic threshold, anaerobic
threshold, and aerobic capacity up from the bottom instead of trying to pull
them up from the top. Whether it is an easy running day or a hard workout,
executing the task at the appropriate pace is integral to the entire training
system.
Easy runs are often misunderstood as junk mileage or filler training.
The truth is, easy runs make up a big percentage of the training week, and
when they are run at the optimal intensities, they promote a wide array of
favorable physiological adaptations. Despite this fact, both novices and
experienced runners struggle with properly pacing these relaxed workouts.
Newer runners tend to run their easy days too hard because the gradual
training plan feels too easy. Most of the time, the intensity evens out as
mileage increases and the runner is too tired to maintain that pace
throughout the week. However, as a coach, I would prefer to have you
adjust the pace to your half-marathon goal and train properly from day one.
--- PAGE 20 ---
This allows you to increase your mileage and intensity safely over weeks
and months. More experienced runners tend to get overzealous in their
training, believing that faster is better, especially for those moving up from
running competitively at shorter distances. Runners in this situation will
quickly be benched as a result of overtraining if they don’t temper their
excitement and allow easy runs to truly be easy. Regardless of your current
level, when we instruct you to run “easy,” we really mean easy. Once you
add in hard workouts, these easy days will serve as active recovery to allow
your body to bounce back and prepare for the next workout.
Proper pacing during hard workouts is equally vital. We cannot stress
enough that workouts are designed to spur specific physiological
adaptations; they are not to be run as hard as you can to see who is the last
person standing. For instance, tempo runs and strength workouts develop
the anaerobic threshold, but that doesn’t mean you should be running a
tempo workout faster than anaerobic threshold pace. Similarly, speed
workouts develop aerobic capacity and should be run just under your
maximal aerobic capacity, not beyond it. Imagine if you are instructed to
run 6 × 800-meter repeats at 5K pace. Let’s say this pace is 6:00 minutes
per mile, or 3:00 for 800 meters. If you do the first three intervals at 2:45,
2:45, and 2:55, there’s a good chance the last three will be around 3:10,
3:15, and perhaps 3:10. While you averaged 3:00, you failed to hit a single
interval at the prescribed pace. This means that you didn’t accumulate any
training at the desired pace, which was specifically set to stimulate aerobic
capacity. The first three were too fast, which exceeded VO2max, producing
anaerobic energy and lactic acid. The last three were then progressively
slower due to fatigue and lactic acid buildup. In the end, you drove yourself
into the ground without gaining any major physiological benefits.
Now you understand why Kevin and Keith assign push-ups. By keeping
your paces in check across the training spectrum, you’ll tolerate higher
training volumes. You’ll also be more consistent in training because you
won’t be so worn-out that you need to take unscheduled days off or modify
workouts. Cumulative fatigue is designed to make you tired, but running
paces faster than prescribed will put you beyond the point of being able to
recover sufficiently. That really is junk mileage.
--- PAGE 21 ---
Balance: Training equilibrium
Whether you are training for a 5K or a marathon, there should always be
one constant: balance. So many programs emphasize one area of training
and sacrifice others. For instance, a 5K program may focus on doing repeats
on the track two times a week at the expense of a weekly long run. On the
other hand, a marathon program may put sole focus on surviving weekly
long runs, but no speed work is to be seen. To fully reach your potential as a
runner, all the physiological systems must be incorporated into training.
Remember, nothing is make-or-break. The long run won’t make your half-
marathon if it’s the only thing you focus on. Being strong and fast and
having endurance will make your half-marathon! This is why all of our
programs emphasize a balanced approach to training.
The Hansons Half-Marathon Method presents you with two types of
runs: easy and something of substance (SOS). SOS runs include speed
workouts, strength workouts, tempo runs, and long runs. Think of these
runs as workouts that require more effort than do easy days. By varying the
training, you reap the necessary physiological benefits in addition to
maintaining motivation. If variety is the spice of life, you’d better include a
good amount of it in your training. In the same way that your mind gets
bored with repetition, so does your body. When you cycle your workouts
and stress each individual system, you stimulate a steady rate of
physiological adaptation. By giving time and energy not just to the long run
but also to easy, strength, speed, tempo, and recovery days, you’ll be a
stronger, more balanced runner. There is such a thing as too much of a good
thing. When you balance your training, you’ll be sure to get just the right
amount of each of those things.
Consistency: Sticking to the game plan
As a coach, I find that many runners struggle with training consistency. One
week they run three days, the next four days, and the next week maybe only
two days. This is unsurprising because each week brings its own challenges
and surprises: Your boss imposes a last-minute deadline, your car breaks
down, or your child gets sick. The unpredictability of life can make sticking
--- PAGE 22 ---
to a training plan difficult. While training adjustments are necessary at
times, a regular running schedule remains important.
Physiologically speaking, inconsistency in training makes for a never-
ending struggle to maintain even a baseline of fitness. While adaptations
can occur rapidly with proper training, they can also be lost with just a
couple of weeks of inconsistent running. For instance, if you train 5 days a
week for 3 weeks, a noticeable improvement in fitness will take place; if,
however, those weeks are followed by 2 weeks of training only 2 or 3 days
a week, your fitness gains will begin to retreat. It then requires 2 more
weeks of consistent running to get back to the previous level. In the end, 6–
8 weeks of running went by just to get you back to where you were at the
third week. If life intervenes, modify training, but don’t skip it. Something
is always better than nothing.
To achieve this consistency, you must establish attainable goals and plan
ahead. If you set your sights too high, you’re likely to get discouraged when
you discover you have too much on your plate. Conversely, if you set them
too low, you get bored. Properly placed goals will keep you motivated to
get out the door each day, even when running feels like the last thing you
want to do. Planning your weekly running schedule in advance also aids in
commitment. Rather than looking at the training program the morning of a
workout, you know what to expect for the next 5–7 days. By penciling your
runs into your day planner or posting them on your refrigerator, you can
plan for hurdles that may be thrown in front of you throughout the week. If
you have an early morning meeting on Tuesday, plan on running after work.
If your kids have a soccer tournament all weekend, find an opening between
games to fit your run in. When you schedule your runs, you are far more
likely to stick to the plan and remain consistent in your training.
Active recovery: Partial rest
When it comes to cumulative fatigue, you walk a fine line between training
enough and overtraining. The goal of the Hansons Method is to take you
close to the line but not over it. The training you do throughout the course
of the program is tough, but it will lead to a better, more enjoyable race-day
--- PAGE 23 ---
result. Incomplete recovery is an important part of the training because it
allows you to perform well, even when you aren’t feeling 100 percent.
Whether you are doing a speed, strength, tempo, or long run, there is a
general preoccupation with the idea of being “fresh” for workouts. That
freshness, however, requires days off before and after workouts, which
takes away from the crucial aerobic adaptations that easy runs offer. While
we don’t put hard workouts back-to-back, we do employ the idea of active
recovery. This means that workouts are often followed by easy running
days. This allows you to recover for the next hard workout without taking
the day off from running. Think about it this way: After a hard workout,
your muscles are depleted of glycogen and feel supremely fatigued. At this
time it is important to replace that glycogen, hydrate, and allow the muscles
to heal. This, however, doesn’t mean you should lie inert on the couch for
the next 24 hours. For one thing, you can’t gain any aerobic fitness if you
take the next day off. Also, you never teach your body how to deal with
long-term discomfort if you always allow it to completely recover. Easy
running is done at low enough intensities that you are primarily burning fat,
allowing your body time to rebuild the lost carbohydrate (glycogen) stores.
In addition, your muscles learn to more efficiently burn fat because they are
running at a pace that promotes fat burning rather than carbohydrate
depletion. The muscles also adapt to the training loads placed on them and
will eventually become stronger. This means you can handle increased
workloads, recover, and gain aerobic fitness faster if you just run easy on
days you don’t have a hard workout.
While recovery is important, cumulative fatigue calls for only partial
recuperation. Even after an easy-run day, your muscles may still be
somewhat fatigued and glycogen stores only moderately refueled, causing
you to feel slightly sluggish. This is normal. You are training your body to
withstand many miles of running. Just as you may feel sluggish toward the
end of the half-marathon and will need to push through, it is important to
learn to keep moving forward during your training. This makes cumulative
fatigue an integral part of your long runs. Although you’ll have the last few
days of training still in your legs, you’ll be recovered enough to run the
long run as desired. Our method teaches your legs to withstand the latter
portion of the half-marathon by loading them with a little fatigue prior to
the long runs.
--- PAGE 24 ---
Put simply, we’re looking to simulate running tired. By feeling fatigued
going into a workout, you know how the late stages of a race will feel.
Knowing you can nail a workout while tired from regular training will
boost your confidence late in the race when things get hard physically and
mentally. That being said, the stress is not so great that you will need the
following week to recover. Instead, the next day will be easy, and then a
workout will follow a couple of days after that. Through a number of
physiological adaptations, cumulative fatigue trains your body to be fully
prepared for the physiological stress imparted by the half-marathon
distance. As you look at our training programs, you’ll notice that every 4
weeks, the mileage increases slightly via easy days, tempo runs, and long
runs. As your body adapts, you vary the stress and continue the progression
upward. Leading up to the big day, you will finally allow your body to fully
recover, giving you that fresh feeling as you toe the line. In other words,
you are ready for peak performance. Our programs are designed this way to
help you feel your best during the race, not during training. After all, you
never want to execute your best performance in practice.
Training for a half-marathon isn’t easy, and it shouldn’t be taken lightly;
a few curse words may be uttered, favorite television shows missed, and
social outings forgone, but you will regret nothing when you successfully
cross that finish line. This entire program has been developed by great
coaches who have learned from other great coaches. It is a philosophy that
can transform you from a person who wants to run a half-marathon into a
bona fide half-marathoner. We’re here to get you there.
Understanding certain physiological principles will help you make
sense of the structure of the training program. That foundation will provide
the “why” while the program will provide the “what to do” and “when to do
it.” The structure of the Hansons Half-Marathon Method is dependent on
the physiological basis of endurance running performance. By
understanding these key principles, runners are less likely to make critical
mistakes in their training.
The end result of all these components is the idea of cumulative fatigue.
After reading the previous pages, you have, I hope, picked up on one thing
—these components are all related. If you remove one or change one
drastically, the whole flow of the philosophy is disrupted. The marathon
training version of our program asks for a very substantial commitment.
--- PAGE 25 ---
However, the beauty of the half-marathon is that the training doesn’t need
to consume as much of your time, and our half-marathon plan may seem
like less of a risk than the marathon plan if it is very different from other
types of training you have tried. It’s also great for me as a coach because I
can introduce you to a slimmer version of the training and then trick you
into training for the full marathon later on! On a serious note, though, don’t
be fooled. Training for a half-marathon takes focus and a strong
commitment; the results, however, will be well worth that commitment.
--- PAGE 26 ---
2
Marathon physiology
IF YOU HAVE EVER watched a track meet on TV and seen an 800-meter
race (a half mile, run in two laps), you may have heard a commentator
comment on how tough that race is to train for. Runners ask themselves, do
I train like a 400-meter sprinter, or do I train like a miler? It’s an odd
distance physiologically and can be tough to dial in. The half-marathon
offers a similar complication: Do I train like a 10K runner or like a
marathon runner? It’s a tricky question, and not all coaches agree on the
answer. But, as with most problems in running, it comes down to you
individually, and in this case your physiology will point you in the right
direction.
I have coached a few people who excelled at shorter distance (5K and
10K) but decided they wanted to try the half-marathon distance.
Unfortunately, their approach to the half-marathon, which is twice as long
as a 10K, was exactly the same. Most of them were too fast in their
workouts, with many of them simply trying to run hard and see how well
they could hang on.
Think about it this way: Consider what goes on when you train for a 5K.
First, it’s a relatively short race, measured in minutes and not hours.
Second, it’s almost a pure speed race, meaning that we have the endurance
to cover the distance, and we tend to want to see how fast we can cover it.
Finally, if you go out too fast, it hurts, but the amount of suffering is limited
by the amount of race left. If you do crash and burn, most likely it will be
for less than a mile.
Now, extrapolate to a 13.1-mile race. If you go out too hard at this
distance, you can suffer for a very long time. What this all means is that
having an idea of why we are suffering and the physiological basis behind it
is critical to our success. Without a basic understanding, we are liable to
make the same training mistakes over and over.
--- PAGE 27 ---
Knowing about physiology, in particular for the half-marathon distance,
is critical for reaching your desired race goals. For a full marathon, no
matter if you are a local legend or are running your first marathon in 4-plus
hours, everybody is training the same energy systems. In other words, how
your body uses energy, what systems it stresses for speed and endurance,
and how fast it is using those energy sources are the same for all
marathoners. Success at any level in marathoning depends on how well you
can adapt to specific training principles. With the half-marathon, in contrast,
smart training—specifically what systems you train—is far more dependent
on what kind of runner you are and your individual race goals. Generally
speaking, for faster runners—those looking to run the half in under 1 hour
and 45 minutes—the training emphasis should be on increasing individual
lactate threshold (or anaerobic threshold). Why? Because those runners will
hover around that threshold for the entire race. For runners on the other end
of the spectrum (wanting to complete the half-marathon in 3-plus hours),
the goal should be improving aerobic pathways, since these runners may
not approach their anaerobic thresholds (at least for the same duration that
the faster folks will). Runners in between the two ends of the spectrum will
need a blend of everything in fairly equal proportions. A lot to take in?
Don’t worry, this chapter will walk you through it.
The human body is a beautifully complicated piece of machinery, but at
the end of the day, if you want to race at your best, there are just five
components of your physiology that you should understand. You may have
heard these terms tossed about and wondered what they meant. I’ll break
them down to arm you with what you really need to know in your training.
These five key components are as follows:
// running-specific muscles
// VO2 max
// anaerobic threshold
// aerobic threshold
// running economy
Running muscles: Forceful influence
--- PAGE 28 ---
When it comes to physiological movers and shakers, the musculature
system is king. More than 600 muscles in your body work to create motion
and force. They allow your heart to beat, your eyes to move, your food to
digest, and your legs to run. The three main types of muscle fibers are
cardiac, smooth, and skeletal. While the cardiac muscle makes your heart
beat, and the smooth muscle lines your intestines, pushing food through
your system, the skeletal muscle plays the starring role in human
locomotion. Skeletal muscles make running possible.
The skeletal muscles are responsible for generating physiological
movement and also are where the majority of energy is stored. These
muscles include slow-twitch fibers and fast-twitch fibers, the latter of which
have several subcategories. Each muscle contains both types of muscle
fiber, which are bound together like bundles of cable, each bundle
consisting of a single type. Thousands of these bundles constitute a muscle,
and each individual bundle is controlled by a single motor neuron. The
motor neurons are located in the central nervous system, where they work
to control muscles and, in turn, movement.
Together, the fibers and the motor neurons make up the motor unit.
Because each bundle contains only one type of fiber, a bundle of slow-
twitch fibers and a bundle of fast-twitch fibers will receive information
from the brain via separate motor units. If one motor neuron is activated, a
weak muscle contraction occurs. If multiple motor neurons are activated, a
more powerful muscular contraction is created. Why is all this important?
Ultimately, the structure of the skeletal muscle system dictates running
ability. So the better you understand your own physiology, the smarter your
training will be. Let’s look closer at the types of muscle fibers.
TYPE I FIBERS (SLOW-TWITCH FIBERS)
Your family tree plays an important role in determining your potential as a
runner. If your parents endowed you with an abundance of Type I muscle
fibers, also called slow-twitch fibers, you have a leg up on the competition.
These fibers are particularly important for endurance events because of
their efficient use of fuel and their resistance to fatigue. Slow-twitch fibers
are aerobic, meaning they use oxygen to transfer energy. This is a result of
the fact that they have a large area of capillaries and, therefore, a much
--- PAGE 29 ---
greater available supply of oxygen than do fast-twitch fibers. Additionally,
these fibers have the machinery necessary for aerobic metabolism to take
place. Known as the mitochondria, this machinery is often referred to as the
“powerhouse of the cell.” Thanks to the mitochondria, you are able to use
fats and carbohydrates as fuel sources to keep your muscles working and
your body running.
True to their name, the slow-twitch fibers also have a slower shortening
speed than the other types of fibers, which serves an important function for
endurance runners. While these fibers cannot generate as much force as the
others, they supply energy at a steady rate and can generate a good amount
of power for an extended period. In addition to being slower to contract,
Type I fibers are only about half the diameter of fast-twitch fibers. Although
they are smaller and slower, they are also more efficient and persistent,
warding off fatigue during a long haul on the roads.
TYPE II FIBERS (FAST-TWITCH FIBERS)
Type II fibers, also known as fast-twitch fibers, are also genetically
determined and are the slow-twitch fibers’ more ostentatious counterpart.
They are bigger and faster, and they pack a powerful punch, but they also
fatigue rapidly. Because these fibers have very few mitochondria, they
transfer energy anaerobically (without the use of oxygen). These forceful
contractions use such large amounts of adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
basically a high-energy molecule, that they quickly tire and become weak.
That is precisely why the Olympic 100-meter champion can run a record-
setting pace only for the length of the homestretch, but the marathon
champion can maintain a record-setting pace for 26.2 miles. Two different
muscle fiber types, two different results.
The Type II fibers are further divided into subgroups, two of the most
common being Type IIa and Type IIb, also known as the intermediate
fibers. The Type IIa fibers share several characteristics with slow-twitch
fibers because they have more mitochondria and capillaries than other types
of fast-twitch fibers. As a result, Type IIa fibers are considered to be
aerobic, although they still provide a more forceful contraction than slow-
twitch fibers. By contrast, Type IIb fibers contract powerfully, transfer
--- PAGE 30 ---
energy anaerobically, and fatigue quickly. See Table 2.1 for a brief
comparison among fiber types.
A WORKING SYSTEM
All humans have both Type I and Type II muscle fibers, but the distribution
varies greatly. Most people, regardless of gender, have a Type I fiber
distribution of 45–55 percent in their arms and legs. Individuals who are
fitness conscious but not completely devoted to training can see a Type I
distribution of around 60 percent. Meanwhile, trained distance runners tend
to have a Type I distribution of 70 percent, and elite marathoners have an
even greater percentage than that. Herein lies the challenge. When it comes
to running a half-marathon, Runner A, who has a high proportion of Type I
fibers, will naturally be better off than Runner B, who has a low Type I and
low Type IIa distribution. So how does Runner B get around his own
physiology?
Luckily for both runners, the body is an amazing machine that can adapt
to a myriad of stresses. In the field of exercise physiology, stress denotes
the repeated and intense training that leads to certain physiological
--- PAGE 31 ---
adaptations. Researchers have long sought the key to muscle fiber
conversion, hoping to discover how a person, such as Runner B, could
actually change the composition of her muscles via training stress.
Although much of the research remains inconclusive, it is agreed that elite
distance runners have a greater proportion of Type I fibers than the average
recreational runner, and that those Type I fibers are necessary for a fast
marathon or half-marathon performance (see Table 2.2 for a comparison
among different types of runners). What we don’t know is if you are
genetically bound to a particular muscle fiber arrangement or if you can
change it with physical training through certain training stresses. Although
it may be too early to make any definite statements about conversions from
Type I to Type II fibers, it has been shown that transformations can take
place within the Type II fibers. Even after a relatively short training block
of 10–12 weeks, a runner can display a transition from anaerobic, fatigable
Type IIb fibers to the more aerobic, fatigue-resistant Type IIa fibers. This is
great for an endurance runner. It shows that training elicits tangible
physiological changes that create performance advantages and real
improvements. There is much hope for Runner B.
MAXIMIZING MUSCLE FIBERS
--- PAGE 32 ---
Whereas all endurance athletes will benefit from fat-burning increases,
glycogen saving, and having an abundance of slow-twitch fibers, there is no
“one size fits all” type of muscle fiber disbursement that is best for all half-
marathoners. For them, the ideal ratio depends on how fast or slow they
run. For instance, faster runners may have a large number of slow-twitch
fibers, but because of the intensity with which they are running, they are
also probably helped a fair amount by their collection of intermediate
fibers. These runners must generate a high amount of force to maintain a
fast pace. Alternately, slower runners do best if they train like marathon
runners, which means having mostly slow-twitch fibers and a high level of
fat utilization and glycogen storage, because their intensity is lower and
their time on their feet is significantly longer—perhaps double that of their
faster counterparts.
Regardless of genetics, training remains a vital predictor of running
performance. Although genetics dictate what kind of work you may be
innately suited for, the right training helps you maximize your individual
potential. We will show you how this can be done, no matter what your
DNA might say. To get your muscles to respond the way you want them to
on race day, you must train them to fire in a particular manner. It all starts
with a signal sent from the motor units in the central nervous system, which
begins by recruiting the slow-twitch fibers. You continue to rely heavily on
those fibers unless you do one of the following:
// increase your pace
// encounter a hill or another force that creates resistance
// run long enough to exhaust the slow-twitch fibers
Depending on their fitness level, some runners can go an hour at a
modest pace before they begin to recruit the fast-twitch fibers; others can go
as much as twice that long. Depending on how fast you are, you may rely
on Type I fibers almost exclusively during your half-marathon. If you are
on the course for a longer period, however, those fibers will begin to tire,
and your body will begin to employ the Type IIa fibers, those slightly
larger, aerobic, fast-twitch fibers. If you’ve trained properly, you’ll have
enough leeway to get through the rest of your race using these fibers. They
aren’t great for endurance running, but they are a good substitute for the
--- PAGE 33 ---
exhausted Type I fibers. Issues arise when the undertrained runner is forced
to go to the third line of defense: Type IIb fibers. Remember, these are built
for power, and they fatigue quickly. If you are relying on these fibers to get
to the finish, things will not end well.
What the Hansons Method seeks to do is teach you how to maximize
the use of the Type I and Type IIa muscle fibers, without having to resort to
the Type IIb fibers.
VO2max: Second in command
If muscle fibers are in the driver’s seat when it comes to endurance
potential, then VO2max works in the pit, constantly providing assistance.
VO2max stands for “volume of oxygen uptake,” defined as the body’s
maximum capacity to transport and utilize oxygen while running. When a
person’s VO2max is 50/ml/kg/min, it is read “50 milliliters of oxygen per
kilogram of body weight per minute.” What you really need to know is that
the higher the number, the better. Although VO2max is often considered the
gold standard of fitness, it doesn’t always serve as the best predictor of
running performance. In fact, elite marathon runners tend to have a slightly
lower VO2max than elite 5K and 10K runners. Still, though it isn’t the
single most important predictor of your racing potential, it remains a
significant piece of the puzzle. Generally speaking, faster half-marathon
runners tend to have a slightly higher VO2max than slower runners because,
as discussed, the slower runners tend to adapt more like a marathon runner
in terms of fat utilization and fiber type, and they have slightly lower
VO2max levels. VO2max will improve with training. Thus, slower runners
can improve their VO2max—and thus their performance—with an increase
in training. Let’s examine this more closely.
Because blood carries oxygen to the muscles, one must look at the heart
when considering VO2max. Like the skeletal muscles, the heart muscle can
be strengthened with work, thus allowing it to pump more blood and deliver
more oxygen to the muscles. The heart adapts to training stress in the same
way the muscles in your legs do. Consider the positive adaptations related
--- PAGE 34 ---
to the heart that occur as a result of endurance training. Four of these
adaptations, shown in Figure 2.1 and described below, are considered the
central components of VO2max:
CIRCULATION OF THE CORONARY ARTERIES
IMPROVES // Improved circulation means more blood reaches the
heart.
VENTRICLE WALLS THICKEN, PARTICULARLY THE
LEFT VENTRICLE // As these thicken, the force of the
contractions becomes greater, pumping more blood into the
circulating arteries.
THE CHAMBER OF THE VENTRICLE BECOMES
LARGER // This allows for more oxygenated blood to be stored
within the ventricle, which is then circulated throughout the body.
PULSE DECREASES // When the cardiac muscle is strengthened,
it doesn’t have to work as hard to do its job.
--- PAGE 35 ---
In sum, more blood is pumped with greater force and less effort.
Because the heart has bigger chambers that hold more blood, heart rate
slows across all running paces, making the entire system more efficient and
healthier.
--- PAGE 36 ---
The heart supplies blood to the body, and the better it can deliver large
amounts of blood into the bloodstream, the more efficiently the oxygen in
the blood reaches the running muscles. What’s more, the adaptations don’t
stop with the heart; they also affect the blood itself. Indeed, blood volume
has been shown to increase with endurance training. Red blood cells, the
most common type of blood cells, are the main means through which
oxygen is delivered within the human body. With endurance training, the
hematocrit level, the amount of red blood cells within the total volume of
blood, decreases. This means that since total blood volume is higher and the
blood itself is less viscous, it can travel through the heart and arteries with
much greater ease. Think of the difference between new oil that has just
been put in your car and the gunk that’s been sitting in the engine for the
last 15,000 miles. A lower hematocrit level equates to less wear and tear on
your system because, as the red blood cells become larger with training, you
lose less oxygen-carrying capacity. Although it may sound
counterproductive, since plasma volume increases, the hematocrit level
decreases because it is expressed as a percentage of volume. So even
though the percentage is lower, the total number of red blood cells can be
higher. Remember, 20 percent of 100 equals 20 red blood cells, and 20
percent of 500 equals 100 red blood cells, giving you more bang for your
buck.
With endurance training, the heart becomes a stronger pump, and the
blood supply becomes bigger and better, but none of that matters if the
muscles cannot use the massive amount of oxygen that is now being
dropped off at their doorstep. The actual delivery of oxygen to the muscles
happens in the capillary bed, which is the end of the line for the artery.
Some of these capillaries are so small that only one red blood cell can drop
off its bounty of oxygen to the muscle at a time. From there, the red blood
cell begins its journey back to the heart and lungs, where it is reloaded with
oxygen. During rest, many of these capillary lines lie dormant. As you
begin running, the lines open up, allowing muscles to accept an increasing
amount of oxygen to meet the demands of exercise.
While improving the central components of VO2max is important,
having a bigger left ventricle to pump more blood doesn’t do much good if
the muscles that are being used can’t handle the changes. Luckily, our
--- PAGE 37 ---
running muscles, as we discussed, adapt simultaneously. Some of the key
peripheral components that we see through endurance training, as shown in
Figure 2.1, are the following:
INCREASED CAPILLARY DENSITY // A larger density of
capillaries means that oxygen can exchange cells faster and more
efficiently, the end result being that the exercising muscle gets the
oxygen it needs to continue to exercise.
IMPROVED MITOCHONDRIAL ENZYME LEVELS AND
ACTIVITY // Think of enzymes as tools that make work easier.
They reduce the amount of energy required to make a reaction
occur. With higher levels, reactions within the mitochondria can
allow more work to be done at the same rate.
IMPROVED MITOCHONDRIAL DENSITY // The
mitochondria are where fats and carbohydrates are presented as fuel
for exercise, so the more mitochondria we have, the more fat that
can be used as fuel to maintain aerobic intensity.
INCREASED SIZE OF EXISTING MITOCHONDRIA //
Bigger mitochondria allow more fuel to be processed at a single site.
If we can process more fatty acids through bigger and more
mitochondria, we reduce the need for carbohydrates to be used and
increase the needed intensity it takes to prompt the anaerobic system
(reliance on carbohydrates for energy).
The bottom line is that the body is remarkable at adapting to training. It
will do everything it can to support a given activity and become better at it.
VO2max is the ceiling for your aerobic potential, but it is not the overall
determinant of potential performance. When your aerobic capacities
become maxed out, your anaerobic faculties are right on their heels. As a
result, other physiological variables contribute to how well a person can run
a half-marathon.
Although it isn’t necessary to determine your VO2max, and we can
guarantee the number will climb with additional endurance training, it is a
--- PAGE 38 ---
great indicator of progress. There are a number of ways to figure out your
VO2max, some more expensive than others. On the high-precision and
high-cost end of the spectrum, you can visit your local gym and have your
capacity tested with an array of fancy equipment. This will require you to
run on a treadmill with a breathing tube, increasing your speed
incrementally. Twenty minutes and $100 later, you’ll have a printout with
some cold, hard data. For a similar experience but potentially less cost, look
into signing up to be a guinea pig at your local university’s exercise
physiology lab. Graduate students often can provide you with a wealth of
information, and you usually won’t have to shell out a dime. I am a believer
in lab testing for the sake of improvement, provided the feedback is of
practical use to you. What good are numbers if you can’t apply them? Both
as an athlete and as a coach, when I look at VO2max and thresholds, I am
only interested in whether they show improvement. Unfortunately, the
results of exercise lab tests often omit the corresponding paces for these
levels and thresholds. For example, when you get tested, the technician will
often give you a number such as 50 ml/kg/min and tell you whether that is
good, average, or below average. That’s great, but how do I use that
information? What does it mean for me? If you choose to be tested, try to
obtain the paces at which you are reaching certain physiological levels. You
can then translate that information directly into your training paces.
If you’re not interested in getting rigged up to a machine, consider
doing a field test. I use the Balke test, for which you need only a track, a
stopwatch, and a calculator. Although the equation can vary slightly, the
following is used by well-known running coach Dr. Joe Vigil, an expert in
the world of running science:
VO2max = 0.178 × ([m ÷ 15] − 150) + 33.3
We solve this equation by completing the Balke test. To
complete the test, do a thorough warm-up and follow these steps:
--- PAGE 39 ---
1. On the track, run fast for 15 minutes, covering as much
distance as possible. (Remember to pace yourself. Don’t run
as hard as you can from the start, but rather build into it, so
that you can be running the fastest over the last few minutes.)
2. Convert the distance you have run into meters. To do this,
multiply the number of laps by 400 meters (1 lap = 400
meters on a standard track).
3. Take the number in meters and convert it to meters per minute
by dividing it by 15 (the number of minutes you ran).
4. Take the number from step 3 and subtract the first 150 m.
5. The remaining number is then multiplied by 0.178 and added
to the base of 33.3. Note: If you don’t have a speed of greater
than 150 m/min, take the difference between your speed and
150, multiply by 0.178, and subtract that number from the
base of 33.3.
For example, we want to solve for this equation:
VO2max = 0.178 × ([m ÷ 15] − 150) + 33.3
Our runner completes the test, covering 10 laps in 15 minutes.
He converts laps to meters and replaces the “m” with a number:
10 laps × 400 m/lap = 4000 m
The equation now looks like this:
VO2max = 0.178 ([4000 ÷ 15] − 150) + 33.3
Next, the runner solves within the brackets:
[4000 ÷ 15] or 266.67
Now the equation looks like this:
--- PAGE 40 ---
VO2max = 0.178 (266.67 − 150) + 33.3
Finally, the runner simply solves the equation:
VO2max = 0.178 (116.67) + 33.3
VO2max = 20.77 + 33.3
VO2max = 54 or, more precisely, 54 ml/kg/min
This means that our runner’s current aerobic fitness is 54.
After determining your baseline VO2max, you can repeat this test in the
middle of your training to check your progress. Keep in mind that the more
advanced the runner, the fewer changes are seen. What can always change,
however, even if only slightly, is the pace you can run at your VO2max.
That’s what really matters in the end.
Anaerobic threshold: Power player
As discussed previously, long-distance running relies heavily on the oxygen
supplied by the aerobic system, which is more efficient and provides greater
endurance than the anaerobic system. The anaerobic system is powerful and
explosive, but it functions without oxygen and therefore can provide only
short bursts of speed before energy stores are depleted, lactic acid builds up
in the muscles, and running ceases. While lactic acid, or lactate, has gotten
a bad rap as a soreness-inducing, fatigue-causing by-product of high-
intensity exercise, it actually serves as an energy source for the muscles,
allowing them to squeak out a bit more work before bonking. Research now
tells us that the fatigue that occurs at that point is caused by another
physiological phenomenon. The real culprits are the electrolytes—sodium,
potassium, and calcium—that are positioned along the muscles, each with
--- PAGE 41 ---
its own electrical charge that triggers muscle contractions. At high
intensities and over time, the potassium ion outside the cell builds up and
cannot switch places with the sodium ion inside the cell. This leads to
weaker and weaker muscle contractions, a condition called neuromuscular
fatigue, meaning your body will soon slow to a sputtering halt.
Not only is blood lactate not the villain we once thought it to be, but
we’ve also come to see that it plays a key role in distance running. The
aerobic system supports a moderate pace for long periods because the
lactate that is produced is simultaneously processed and removed. However,
as the aerobic system fatigues or the intensity increases, you become more
dependent on the anaerobic system and, in turn, reach a point where you
produce lactate faster than your body can get rid of it. Referred to as lactate
threshold, onset of blood lactate, or anaerobic threshold, this is the tipping
point at which lactic acid starts to build up in your bloodstream.
Anaerobic threshold is particularly important because it has been
identified as perhaps the best predictor of endurance performance. It occurs
at anywhere between 60 and 90 percent or more of a person’s VO2max, so
as you get closer to your VO2max, blood lactate begins to accumulate. The
best of the best tend to have an anaerobic threshold exceeding 70 percent of
VO2max. Training may raise your VO2max only a few points, but it can
have a significant impact on anaerobic threshold. If you look at a group of
elite marathon runners, their VO2max levels will be similar; what tends to
separate 1st place from 10th place is anaerobic threshold. While VO2max
may separate the national class from recreational runners, anaerobic
threshold separates the champions from the contenders.
As with VO2max, testing your anaerobic threshold is always an option,
but it requires some guesswork unless you have the testing done in a fancy
lab, with the numbers printed out for you. Our advice is to see how your
body responds to the workouts on the plan. As mentioned, anaerobic
threshold pace can be maintained for about an hour. If you don’t have these
paces to use, then ask yourself, “Can I hold this for an hour straight?”
Adjust your pace accordingly based on your response.
Remember that anaerobic threshold is the point at which the aerobic
pathways are still providing energy for muscle contraction, but they can’t
do it fast enough to provide all the required energy. This is where the
--- PAGE 42 ---
anaerobic pathways begin to make up the difference. As a rule of thumb, a
person can run at his or her anaerobic threshold for about an hour. As you
may have guessed, this becomes increasingly important for elite runners,
whose half-marathon times tend to hover around an hour. For these folks,
having a high anaerobic threshold is probably more important than being
able to burn fat for fuel. The higher this threshold is, the faster they can
cover the distance before having to slow down; thus, raising this level is
critical for their individual success. For slower runners, anaerobic threshold
may be a better representation of their 10K times because their 10K times
probably hover closer to that 1-hour mark than do their half-marathon
times. So, although anaerobic threshold is important for slower runners (and
even more so as they become faster), the ability to burn fat and save
glycogen will probably have more bearing on their success.
We can push the threshold higher via training. By running farther and
faster, we train our bodies to rely more heavily on the aerobic pathways,
thus improving endurance and increasing the time it takes to reach the point
of anaerobic reliance. One of the big differences between the Hansons
Method and traditional training programs is that we teach you to stimulate
aerobic metabolism through a large volume of aerobic training, not high-
end anaerobic work.
Aerobic threshold: Glycogen depletion
All this talk about energy systems may have you wondering where that
energy comes from in the first place. The short answer: fats and
carbohydrates. As an endurance runner, you should focus on training the
body to use fat as the primary source of energy. Our bodies store very small
amounts of carbohydrates for quick energy, but our fat stores are nearly
endless. Even if you have only a small percentage of body fat, your system
has plenty of fat for fuel. Fat is particularly high in energy because it
provides nearly twice as many calories per gram as do carbohydrates. The
only problem is that the oxidation of fat to energy is slower than the
oxidation of carbohydrates. For most people, fat serves as the main source
of energy for up to about 50 percent of VO2max because up to that point the
fat can be processed fast enough through the mitochondria to supply the
--- PAGE 43 ---
demands that running requires. For most runners, however, 50 percent of
VO2max is painfully slow. After that point, whether as a result of distance
or intensity, the body looks to burn carbohydrates. The term aerobic
threshold reflects the pace at which the proportion of fat and carbohydrate
being used for fuel is about 50/50. See Figure 2.2 for a graph that illustrates
the contribution of fat and carbohydrate based on running intensity.
The reason carbohydrates (glycogen) provide the majority of energy at
faster paces is because fat is metabolized slower than carbohydrate. The
--- PAGE 44 ---
downside of relying on glycogen stores for energy is that you have only
about 2 hours’ worth, and once they are gone, your run is over. When you
burn through your stored glycogen, your body will draw upon the glucose
in your blood, which runs out even more quickly. The result is “hitting the
wall” or “bonking.” While bonking is more common during a full
marathon, poorly prepared or poorly fueled runners can certainly
experience it in the half-marathon distance. How do you know if you have
hit the wall? For one, your pace slows perceptibly, and the feeling
associated with bonking has been described as similar to dragging a 300-
pound anchor behind you. Although this was once thought to be an
unavoidable rite of passage for long-distance racers, a smart training plan
will help you skirt the wall altogether. It’s all about burning fat for a longer
time to put off drawing on those limited carbohydrate stores.
Being able to “burn” fat more efficiently is invaluable across the
spectrum of paces. Faster runners are running at a high percentage of their
VO2max for a significant amount of time, and a larger proportion of their
energy expenditure is coming from the use of carbohydrates. So, even
though they are likely to finish the half-marathon in less than 2 hours, they
can still nearly exhaust their stores because the percentage of glycogen
usage is so high. Meanwhile, those on the slower end of the spectrum are
out on the course for more than 2 hours, and being able to utilize fat better
will save their glycogen stores and ensure that they can complete the race
and even finish strong.
Luckily for the distance runner, it is possible to train the body to burn
fat longer. The speed at which fat can be processed doesn’t change with
training, so to be able to use more fat, we have to burn a higher volume of
it. To do this, we need more metabolic factories (the mitochondria, which,
as mentioned earlier, are the powerhouse of the cell). Aerobic training, such
as running, helps to increase the number of mitochondria, which in turn
introduces new enzyme activity and oxygen to the system. While the
mitochondria are not necessarily producing more quickly, they are bigger
and more plentiful, which allows fat to be oxidized and turned into energy
for muscle contraction. With the increase in energy from fat, the glycogen
in the muscles isn’t tapped until later, saving it for faster paces. Basically,
the wall is pushed back and, with any luck, never reached.
--- PAGE 45 ---
Figures 2.3 and 2.4 illustrate what has been discussed so far. Figure 2.3
represents typical results of a VO2max treadmill test of a trained runner. For
the most part, as the intensity increases, you observe a linear increase in the
amount of oxygen used. At our threshold points, we can see slight
deflections on the graph. The first represents the aerobic threshold; the
second represents the anaerobic threshold. Figure 2.4 represents the actual
blood lactate measurements from a treadmill test. By graphing the amount
of lactate in the blood at set intervals of a test, we can again see the
deflection points that coincide with our threshold points.

--- PAGE 46 ---
The take-home here is that improving one’s aerobic threshold is vital for
a successful half-marathon, regardless of pace. Improving the ability to
process fat as a fuel at higher intensities will give you more stamina and
ultimately make you faster. From a training perspective it shows why easy
runs, which are a large part of the Hansons Method, facilitate quality
adaptations in the short term and long term. They are far from “junk miles”
and should not be omitted.
--- PAGE 47 ---
Running economy: Pace matters
Running economy, which describes how much oxygen is required to run a
certain pace, is the final physiological topic runners should understand.
Consider this scenario: Runner A and Runner B both have the same
VO2max of 60 ml/kg/min. It might take Runner B 50 ml/kg/min to run a
6:30 mile, while it takes Runner A 55 ml/kg/min to run the same pace.
Given this, Runner B is more economical than Runner A but, more
important, is probably faster too. See Figure 2.5 for a graphic example.

--- PAGE 48 ---
Although there has been much debate over the effects of running
economy, two facts are clear. First, running economy depends on a high
training volume. You don’t need to pound out 120-mile weeks, but your
mileage should be sufficient for the distance for which you are training.
When I say “sufficient,” I am referring to the amount of mileage required to
perform well in your event. For instance, 20 miles a week is sufficient
volume for a beginning 5K runner but not nearly enough for an advanced
half-marathoner. This varies depending on the event you are training for, the
number of months and years you have been running, and how fast you are
attempting to run.
The second component of running economy is speed training. By
training at a certain pace, you become more economical at that pace.
Because the goal is to improve running economy at race pace, you must
spend an adequate amount of time training at race pace. This also
underscores why it is important not to run workouts faster than prescribed
and why pace is such a key part of our program. When you opt to run faster
than suggested, you are training at a level that you may not be ready for,
based on actual race performances. Training above suggested paces turns
workouts into something they were not intended to be; for example, easy
runs may now resemble tempo runs, tempo runs become strength runs, and
strength runs become speed runs. These paces may feel achievable at first,
but it is our experience that the majority of people who train too fast end up
overtrained, burned-out, or injured. If you feel strongly about training at a
faster pace, then it is important to run (or simulate) a race to confirm that
you are ready to move to a more aggressive pace goal.
The validity of running economy is not without some controversy. Some
coaches and well-known exercise science folks question whether running
economy matters when comparing runners. If the runners are comparable in
race times, then maybe it does. If they are not, it may not really matter. Put
another way, if you are a construction worker looking to buy a new pickup,
do you care about the economy of a coupe? Probably not, because it’s not
what you want to buy. But if you find you can get a new F150 that gets 30
miles per gallon without a loss in performance, your ears perk up, right?
This is especially so if the truck outperforms others on the market. What I
am saying is, economy is important, but use it as a way to evaluate your
own personal improvement. If you improve your running economy, then
--- PAGE 49 ---
you are going to get faster. If you process fat better and improve your
VO2max and your anaerobic threshold, you will be a better runner. And
because of these improvements, you will be able to run faster using less
energy. For instance, prior to training, perhaps you ran 7:00 minutes per
mile and were at 75 percent VO2max, and now you are running the same
pace but at 70 percent VO2max. Running economy allows you to quantify
such changes and gives you a look at how these factors have helped you to
improve.
A physiologically based method
By understanding the physiological factors involved in optimal endurance
training, you can understand the justification for each workout. As muscle
fibers adapt to running stress, VO2max is optimized, anaerobic threshold
improves, and the ability to burn fat at higher intensities increases. In the
end, improved running economy is the result of consistent, optimal training.
It all comes down to the tiny biological happenings of the human body;
increased capillarization, an increased number and size of mitochondria,
and greater mitochondrial enzyme activity equate to less oxygen being
needed to run the same paces. The beauty of the Hansons Method is that it
allows runners of all abilities to do the same workouts but at paces that are
going to benefit the individual. The physiological adaptations are what
make you better, and the Hansons Method is designed to ensure you
develop these adaptations.
--- PAGE 51 ---
3
Training program components
I RECENTLY HAD A conversation with one of our coaches regarding
success. He asked me, “Is it considered a success when a runner does 50
percent of the work and achieves 70 percent of his goal?” The question
arose when one of our online athletes spent an entire training segment
struggling to find any semblance of consistency. Workouts were constantly
being changed, moved, or abandoned. By the end of this athlete’s training
block, we were wondering how well a runner could do when a training plan
was so drastically altered. Well, we got that answer. Unfortunately, for our
athlete, it was not a good result.
In Chapter 2, we discussed the unique physiology of the half-marathon
and how individual it can be. In this chapter, we will examine the
components of training that will take that complex physiology and turn it
into a formula that will get you to your half-marathon goal.
As you begin to dissect our training plans, consider the various elements
that make up the Just Finish Program, the Beginner Program, and the
Advanced Program. By varying your training from one day to the next, you
train different systems, which all work in concert to optimize your running
potential. Runs are organized in categories: easy days and something of
substance (SOS) workouts. Figure 3.1 shows the breakdown of weekly
mileage. The SOS workouts include long, tempo, strength, and speed runs.
Long runs are included under SOS because, by definition, they require more
effort than a regular easy day. However, their pace is slower than race pace
and could be defined as easy. Specifically, long run pace in half-marathon
training is 1:10–2:30 per mile slower than your race pace.
--- PAGE 52 ---
Often, we are asked about incorporating hills, or hill repeats, in training.
As you may notice, the training program has no specific designation of
hills. In part this is to simplify the program and make it easy to follow. Hills
are a great aspect of training, but for the purposes of our book and our
audience, they may be better dealt with on an individual basis. Additionally,
training for any endurance event should involve training on a variety of
surfaces. In particular, while speed workouts are usually done on a track or
flat area, strength workouts should be done on more undulating terrain. For
instance, the Hansons-Brooks Distance Project athletes do strength
workouts on a 6-mile loop at a local park that includes rolling terrain. This
--- PAGE 53 ---
allows them to experience hills during an SOS workout without having to
devote specific workouts to hills.
The basis for the Hansons Method’s varied approach stems from the
overload principle, which states that when the body engages in an activity
that disrupts its present state of homeostasis (inner balance), certain
recovery mechanisms are initiated. As discussed in Chapter 2, different
stresses work to overload the system, stimulating physiological changes.
These adaptations, in turn, better prepare the body for that particular stress
the next time it is encountered. This is where the principle of cumulative
fatigue comes in, which underscores our entire training philosophy.
Cumulative fatigue is all about challenging the body without reaching the
point of no return (overtraining). Over the course of training, you’ll notice
that our workouts are designed to stress the different thresholds without
maxing out any single one. By doing the various workouts at the prescribed
pace and intensity, you will walk that line right to the edge for maximum
benefits, but never cross over it.
Easy days
EASY RUNNING
Misconceptions abound when it comes to easy running. Such training is
often thought of as unnecessary, filler mileage. Many new runners believe
that these days can be considered optional because they don’t provide any
real benefits. Don’t be fooled; easy mileage plays a vital role in a runner’s
development. Every run doesn’t need to be—and should not be—a knock-
down, drag-out experience. Easy runs dole out plenty of important
advantages, without any of the pain, by providing a gentler overload that
can be applied in a higher volume than in SOS workouts. This keeps the
body in a constant state of slight disruption, protecting you from getting
injured while simultaneously forcing your body to adapt to stress to
increase fitness.
In the Advanced Program’s peak week, we prescribe a ceiling of 50
miles (give or take a couple miles). If we look closer, 30 of those miles, or
60 percent, are classified as easy. This figure includes the long run, because
--- PAGE 54 ---
even though the distance of the run can make it an SOS day, the benefits
you gain from the long run are the same as what you gain from easy runs.
Figure 3.2 provides justification for why nearly half of the weekly mileage
is devoted to this type of training.

--- PAGE 55 ---
To understand why easy running is important, you must consider the
physiological adaptations that it stimulates in muscle fiber development,
energy utilization, capillary development, cardiovascular strength, and
structural fitness.
Physiology of easy running
When considering reasons why easy running is important, look no further
than what it does for the muscle fibers. As discussed in Chapter 2, even
though the amount of slow-twitch fibers a runner is genetically endowed
with will ultimately define his or her potential as a half-marathoner, training
can make a difference. Easy running recruits a whole host of slow-twitch
fibers because they have a lower “firing,” or contraction, threshold than the
more powerful fast-twitch fibers. Like any other muscle, the more they are
used, the more they develop. Along with improved resistance to fatigue,
slow-twitch muscles can be relied upon for more miles, keeping the fast-
twitch muscles from being fully engaged until farther down the road. In the
end, easy running helps develop slow-twitch fibers that are more fatigue-
resistant and fast-twitch fibers that take on many of the characteristics of
the slow-twitch fibers.
What’s more, the more slow-twitch fibers you have, the better you’ll be
prepared to use fats for energy. We now know this is a very good thing
because the body contains copious amounts of fat to burn and only a limited
supply of carbohydrates. The greater length of time you burn fat, rather than
carbohydrate, the longer you put off encountering the dreaded “wall” as a
result of glycogen (carbohydrate) depletion. When you run at lower
intensities, you burn around 70 percent fat and 30 percent carbohydrate.
With an increase in pace comes an increase in the percentage of
carbohydrates you burn. Your easy running days serve as catalysts to
develop those slow-twitch muscle fibers and, consequently, teach your body
to burn fats over carbohydrates. Slow-twitch fibers are better than fast-
twitch fibers at burning fat because they contain greater amounts of
mitochondria, enzymes that burn fat, and capillaries.
In response to the need for fat to provide the lion’s share of the fuel for
training, the mitochondria grow larger and are dispersed throughout the
muscles. In fact, research has indicated that just six to seven months of
--- PAGE 56 ---
training can spur the mitochondria to grow in size by as much as 35 percent
and in number by 5 percent. This benefits you as a runner because the
higher density of mitochondria works to break down fat more effectively.
For instance, if you burned 60 percent fat at a certain pace a year ago,
training may have increased that percentage to 70 percent.
Thanks to easy running, your body will also see an uptick in the
enzymes that help to burn fat. Every cell in your body contains these
enzymes, which sit waiting to be “turned on” by aerobic activity. No pills or
special surgeries are needed; this is simply your body’s natural way of
burning fat. The enzymes work to make it possible for fats to enter the
bloodstream and then travel to the muscles to be used as fuel. With the help
of the increased mitochondria and fat-burning enzymes, the body utilizes fat
for a longer period, pushing back “the wall” and keeping you running
longer.
Capillary development is another benefit of easy running. Because
running requires a greater amount of blood to supply oxygen to your
system, the number of capillaries within the exercising muscles increases
with training. After just a few months of running, capillary beds can
increase by as much as 40 percent. In addition, slow-twitch fibers contain a
more extensive network of capillaries than do fast-twitch fibers, supplying
those slower fibers with much more oxygen. As the density of capillaries
increases throughout those muscles, a greater amount of oxygen is supplied
in a more efficient manner.
Easy running also results in a number of adaptations that happen outside
the exercising muscles. As you know, your body requires more oxygen as
workload increases, and the way to deliver more oxygen to your system is
to deliver more blood. With several months of training, much of which is
easy running, a runner will experience an increase in hemoglobin, the
“oxygen transporter,” in addition to a 35–40 percent increase in plasma
volume. This increased volume not only helps deliver oxygen but also
carries away the waste products that result from metabolism.
The best way to encourage these developments is through easy running.
If a person were to eliminate the easy runs from a program, all these
adaptations would be greatly reduced. On the one hand, think about the
volume of running you can do in an interval workout; it might be just a few
miles of hard work. On the other hand, think about the amount of easy
--- PAGE 57 ---
running you can do—miles and miles per week. When you try to stress a
system at the top (near 100 percent of capability), you can do only a limited
amount of work. When you build a system from the bottom up, you can do
a much larger volume. In other words, your daily easy runs provide the
heart a much bigger opportunity to adapt to a moderate workload, rather
than a limited volume of extremely hard work.
Easy running also leads to certain structural changes to your
physiological system that are advantageous for good running of any
distance. The main adaptation occurs within the tendons of the running
muscles. During running, the body lands at a force several times that of the
runner’s body weight; the faster the pace, the greater that force becomes.
The resulting strain on tendons and joints, applied gradually through easy
running, allows the body to slowly adapt to higher-impact forces so it can
later handle the greater demands of fast-paced running.
Collectively, these adaptations stimulated by easy running prompt
improvements in VO2max, anaerobic threshold, and running economy.
Whereas fast anaerobic workouts provide little improvement in the
muscles’ aerobic capacity and endurance, large amounts of easy running
can bump aerobic development upward by leaps and bounds. Whether
you’re looking to strengthen your heart, transport more oxygen to the
working muscles, or simply be able to run longer at a certain pace, all signs
point to the benefit of including a good deal of easy running in your
training.
Easy running guidelines
An easy run is usually defined as one that lasts anywhere between 20
minutes and 2.5 hours at an intensity of 55–75 percent of VO2max. Because
most of us don’t have the means to get VO2max tested, the next best thing
is to look at pace per mile. The Hansons Half-Marathon Method calls for
easy runs to be paced 1:30–2:30 minutes slower than goal race pace. For
example, if your goal half-marathon pace is 7:00 minutes per mile, your
easy pace should be 8:30–9:30 minutes per mile. While easy running is a
necessary part of training, and controlling your pace is key to its
effectiveness, be sure not to run too easy. If your pace is excessively slow,
--- PAGE 58 ---
you are simply breaking down tendon and bone without obtaining any
aerobic benefits. Refer to Table 3.5 at the end of this chapter for your
specific guidelines.
Keep in mind that there is a time for “fast” easy runs (1:30 minutes per
mile slower than half-marathon pace) and also a time for “slow” easy runs
(2:30 minutes per mile slower than half-marathon pace). “Fast” and “slow”
easy runs are not denoted on the calendar, in order to allow for some
flexibility depending on your experience and fitness levels. If you are a
rookie runner, focus more on covering ground and less on running at a
certain speed. Advanced runners, in contrast, should alternate between
faster and slower paces for their easy runs, especially during long runs.
Warm-ups and cooldowns are instances when you will want to run on the
slower end of the spectrum. Here the idea is to simply bridge the gap
between no running and fast running and vice versa. The day after an SOS
workout is another time you may choose (depending on your experience) a
pace on the slow side. For instance, if you have a long run on Sunday and a
strength workout on Tuesday, then your Monday run should be easier to
ensure you are recovered and ready for a good workout on Tuesday. By
running the easy runs on the slower end of the range, beginning runners will
safely make the transition to higher mileage. More advanced runners will
likely find that they can handle the faster end of the easy range, even after
SOS workouts. The day following a tempo run and the second easy day
prior to a long run both provide good chances to run closer to 1:30 minutes
per mile slower than half-marathon race pace.
Whether you are a novice or an experienced runner looking for a new
approach, stick to the plan when it comes to easy running. Have fun with
the easy days, allowing yourself to take in the scenery or enjoy a social run
with friends. Meanwhile, you’ll be simultaneously racking up a laundry list
of physiological benefits. What’s more, after a nice, relaxed run, your body
will be clamoring for a challenge, ready to tackle the next SOS workout.
The schedule in Table 3.1 gives you a general idea of how easy runs fit
into the overall training schedule. On Mondays, distances will range from 4
to 8 miles, followed by a speed session on Tuesday and then a longer run on
Sunday. Also, note that the easy days that land on Fridays follow the
Thursday tempo runs. This is where overtraining can occur, when easy runs
are sandwiched between SOS workouts. It is common for this to happen
--- PAGE 59 ---
during the first part of the training schedules when runners are still feeling
fresh, causing them to run faster than prescribed. Remember, these are not
the days to worry about how fast you are running; time on your feet is the
focus, not pace.
For the Saturday easy run, you can be a little more flexible with pace. If
you feel good, run on the faster end of your easy running spectrum. The
metabolic adaptations will happen throughout the pace range, but injury can
occur if you make a habit of always running faster, so be sure to moderate
your pace. Table 3.1 also shows that you get to a point where it is not
logical to keep adding workouts to your training week; if progression is to
take place, it must come from adding another easy day (Wednesday) and/or
adding mileage to the easy days, not from simply running harder. You will
notice in the Hansons Half-Marathon Method that once the workouts peak
in mileage, the easy days are what add to the weekly mileage.
CROSSTRAINING AS A RUNNING SUBSTITUTE
Crosstraining as supplemental training will be discussed in Chapter 7.
However, here I would like to address crosstraining serving as replacement
training. The Hansons Method is designed to get you to your goal, and that
means following the programs as written, as closely as possible. The more
--- PAGE 60 ---
you become familiar with our training methods, the more you realize that
our programs ask for more running than some other popular training plans.
Why? Because to get better at running, you need to run. This is called
“specificity.” Exchanging easy runs for crosstraining workouts takes away a
vital component of running development and the concomitant physiological
developments and benefits discussed in this chapter. It also sets the runner
up for a potential downfall in races. Why? Programs that specify less
running and fewer running days per week tend to produce runners who are
always fresh for workouts; thus, these athletes tend to run the workouts too
hard yet feel good doing it. This can lead to overconfidence and poor
strategy on race day. One of the primary arguments I get from the runners I
coach is “But, Luke, I can’t run mileage. I always get hurt.” Instead, they
prefer a 3-day-a-week program, adding in crosstraining on other days of the
week. This is not going to get you to your best half-marathon. You do not
need to be afraid of mileage; most people can handle increases in mileage
when they are done in a gradual manner. But you do need to add mileage
the right way:
// Don’t go from all crosstraining to all running. Phase out
crosstraining gradually. Try replacing a crosstraining session
with a run each week, prior to beginning our training program.
// Consider adding mileage to your shorter runs little by little, such
as simply adding a mile to each of your easy runs during the
week.
// Run your appropriate paces, even if it means slowing down,
especially for your easy days.
SOS workouts
THE LONG RUN
When it comes to training for distance races, nothing gets more press—
good and bad—than the long run. It has become a status symbol among
runners in training, a measure by which one compares oneself with one’s
running counterparts. For many, the long run is like a big question mark,
--- PAGE 61 ---
hovering in your training plan, something you aren’t sure you’ll survive, but
you subject yourself to the suffering nonetheless. Although the long run
doesn’t cast as large a shadow in half-marathon training as it does in
marathon training, it remains a focal point for most good half-marathon
programs. It is surprising, then, to discover that much of the existing advice
on running long is misguided. After relatively low-mileage weeks, some
plans suggest grueling long runs that end up more akin to running
misadventures than productive training. For example, a 16-mile long run at
the end of a 3-day-a-week half-marathon training program can be both
demoralizing and injurious.
Our approach to the half-marathon is thoughtful and methodical, with
long run mileage chosen in line with the overall goal of achieving
cumulative fatigue. For reasons discussed in Chapter 1, cumulative fatigue
is key to the Hansons Method’s success. However, the long run should
successfully stimulate this effect without completely zapping your legs.
This way, rather than spending the entire week recovering from the previous
long run, you continue to build your base for the forthcoming long effort.
Take a look at a week in the program that includes a Sunday long run
(see Table 4.3). Leading up to it, you will do a tempo run on Thursday and
easier short runs on Friday and Saturday. We don’t give you a day
completely off before a long run because recovery occurs on the easy
running days. Because no single workout has totally diminished your
energy stores and left your legs feeling wrecked, fatigue accumulates over
time. The plan allows for partial recovery, but it is designed to keep you
from feeling completely fresh going into a long run. Following the Sunday
long run, you will have an easy day on Monday and a strength workout on
Tuesday. This may initially appear to be too much, but because your long
run’s pace and mileage are tailored to your ability and experience, less
recovery time is needed.
Physiology of long runs
Long runs provide a number of benefits, many of which correlate with the
gains from easy running. Mentally, long runs help you build confidence as
you increase your mileage from one week to the next. They help you
develop the coping skills necessary to complete any endurance event. They
--- PAGE 62 ---
teach you how to persist even when you are not feeling 100 percent.
Because you never know what is going to happen on race day, this can be a
real asset. Most notable, however, are the physiological adaptations that
occur as a result of long runs. Improved VO2max, increased capillary
growth, a stronger heart, and the ability to utilize fat on a cellular level are
among the benefits. When your body is trained to run long, it adapts and
learns to store more glycogen, thereby allowing you to go farther before
becoming exhausted.
In addition to increasing the energy stores in your muscles, long runs
increase muscle strength. Although your body first exploits the slow-twitch
muscle fibers during a long run, it eventually begins to recruit the fast-
twitch fibers as the slow-twitch fibers fatigue. The only way to train those
fast-twitch fibers is to run long enough to tire the slow-twitch fibers first; by
strengthening all of these fibers, you’ll avoid bonking on race day. By now
the majority of these adaptations are probably starting to sound familiar.
The benefits of long runs include:
// greater confidence as you increase mileage across weeks
// improved VO2max
// ability to utilize fat on a cellular level
// increased muscle strength
// increased energy stores in muscles
Long run guidelines
Advice from renowned running researcher and coach Dr. Jack Daniels
provides a basis for our long run philosophy. He instructs runners never to
exceed 25–30 percent of their weekly mileage in a long run, whether they
are training for a 5K, a half-marathon, or a full marathon. He adds that a
2:30-hour to 3:00-hour time limit should be enforced, suggesting that
exceeding those guidelines offers no physiological benefit and may lead to
overtraining, injuries, and burnout. Dr. Dave Martin, running researcher at
--- PAGE 63 ---
Georgia State University and a consultant to Team USA, recommends that
long runs be between 90 minutes and 2 hours long.
According to legendary South African researcher and author Tim
Noakes, a continual easy to moderate run at 70–85 percent VO2max that is
sustained for 2 hours or more will lead to the greatest glycogen depletion.
Exercise physiologist Dr. David Costill has also noted that a 2-hour bout of
running reduces muscle glycogen by as much as 50 percent. While this rate
of glycogen depletion is acceptable on race day, it is counterproductive in
the middle of a training cycle because it takes up to 72 hours to replenish
these stores. When you diminish your energy stores too dramatically, you
can be benched by fatigue, missing out on important training, or you do the
training on overly tired legs and end up hurting yourself. Instead of flirting
with the point of diminishing returns and prescribing an arbitrary 20-mile
run, the Hansons Method looks at percentage of weekly mileage and total
time spent running. We determine your long run based on your weekly total
mileage and your pace for that long run. It may sound unconventional, but
you’ll find that nothing we suggest is random; it is firmly based in science,
with proven results. Table 3.2 indicates how far your long run should be
based on your total mileage for the week.

--- PAGE 64 ---
Pace is a significant part of the equation. In addition to completing the
optimal number of miles on each long run, you must adhere to a certain
pace to get the most benefit. If you are new to running, or new to running
longer distances, the first goal is to simply build your endurance. In that
case, running slow enough to be able to cover the distance is the objective.
As you become more fit, faster, and more experienced, pace begins to play
its role in the body’s overall adaptations achieved from long runs. As your
endurance builds, your pace will probably increase naturally.
Because we don’t all cover the same distance in the same amount of
time, it only makes sense to adjust a long run depending on how fast you
will be traveling. Research tells us that 2–3 hours is the optimal window for
metabolic adaptation in terms of long runs. Beyond that window, muscle
breakdown begins to occur. Table 3.3 shows how long it takes to complete
long runs of 10, 12, and 14 miles, respectively. Making an assumption that
slower runners are more likely to be running fewer weekly miles, we can
see that these distances are great examples of how mileage, time, and
percentage of weekly mileage are all intertwined.

--- PAGE 65 ---
Of course you must first determine the pace you will be running before
deciding exactly how long your long runs should be. We generally coach
runners to hold an easy to moderate pace throughout a long run. Instead of
viewing it as a high-volume easy day, think of it as a long workout. If you
are new to the half-marathon, err on the easy side of pacing as you become
accustomed to the longer distances. More advanced runners should
maintain a moderate pace because their muscles have already adapted to the
stress of such feats of endurance. In the big picture of training, when you
avoid overdoing these lengthy workouts, you reap more benefits and avoid
the potential downfalls of overtraining. Refer to Table 3.5 for exact paces.
SPEED WORKOUTS
With speed workouts, half-marathon training begins to get more interesting.
When we refer to speed training, we are talking about interval sessions, also
called repeat workouts. Speed workouts require you to run multiple bouts of
certain distances at high intensities with recovery between the fast
segments. This type of training not only plays a role in prompting some of
the important physiological changes we already discussed but also teaches
your mind to handle harder work. While easy days are typically low-
pressure, speed workouts require you to put your game face on, and
discipline is one of many benefits garnered. While you may be able to
complete an easy run the morning after a late night out on the town, if you
want to get the most out of your speed work, you will need to eat a hearty
dinner and hit the hay at a decent hour. For whatever you give up to
optimally execute these workouts, the training will give back to you tenfold.
Every speed workout you complete is like money in the bank when it comes
to resources on which you can draw during the most difficult moments of
the race.
Surprisingly, advanced runners often make the same mistakes that
novices do in terms of speed training, namely, they neglect it. For instance,
we have had runners come to us feeling stale after running several races in a
year. Digging into these runners’ histories, we often find that they are
running so many races that they have completely forgone speed training,
spending all their time on long runs, tempo runs, and recovery. Along with
flat workouts tend to come stagnated finishing times. That’s where we set
--- PAGE 66 ---
them straight by guiding them through the Hansons Half-Marathon Method.
Like the other types of workouts, speed training is an important part of
constantly keeping your system on its toes, requiring it to adapt to workouts
that vary in intensity and distance.
Many runners who train for the half-marathon distance have done speed
work in the past. Therefore, convincing them that speed work is important
is not as difficult as it can be with marathon runners, who tend to neglect it.
That said, some folks go too far in the other direction, putting too much
emphasis on speed work, which can result in injury. The lesson here is to
remember that all training has a purpose and a place.
If you are new to half-marathoning and your past speed workouts have
consisted of simply running some days slightly faster than others, you are in
the majority. Luckily, the speed workouts we give you here can provide an
introductory course on how to implement harder workouts. As you learn to
properly implement speed workouts, your training will be transformed from
perhaps a somewhat aimless approach to fitness to a guided plan of attack.
These workouts can also help you predict what you might be capable of in
your half-marathon. With the help of speed work, you can successfully run
a shorter race, such as a 5K or 10K, and then plug that time into a race
equivalency chart to determine your potential half-marathon time.
Additionally, this work helps to highlight weak areas while there is still
enough time to address and correct them.
Physiology of speed workouts
The greatest beneficiaries of speed training are the working muscles. With
speed sessions, not only the slow-twitch fibers but also the intermediate
fibers become maximally activated to provide aerobic energy. This forces
the slow-twitch fibers to maximize their aerobic capacities, but it also trains
the intermediate fibers to step in when the slow-twitch fibers become
fatigued. As a result of better muscle coordination, running economy
improves. Stimulated by everything from speed workouts to easy running,
running economy is all about how efficiently your body utilizes oxygen at a
certain pace. The better we can use oxygen, the farther and faster we can
run.
--- PAGE 67 ---
Another adaptation that occurs through speed work is the increased
production of myoglobin. In fact, research tells us that the best way to
develop myoglobin is through high-intensity running (above 80 percent
VO2max). Similar to the way hemoglobin carries oxygen to the blood,
myoglobin helps transport oxygen to the muscles and then to the
mitochondria. With its help, the increased demand for oxygen is met to
match capillary delivery and the needs of the mitochondria. Exercise at
higher intensities can also increase anaerobic threshold. Basically, the speed
intervals provide a two-for-one ticket by developing the anaerobic threshold
and VO2max during the same workout. What’s more, because speed
sessions include high-intensity running near 100 percent VO2max (but not
over), glycogen stores provide upwards of 90 percent of the energy, thus
rapidly depleting them. This, in turn, forces the muscles to adapt and store
more glycogen to be used later in workouts.
The benefits of speed work include:
// maximal development of muscle fiber
// running economy improvement
// increased myoglobin
// improved anaerobic threshold
// triggering of increased glycogen storage
Speed guidelines
You’ll notice that the speed segments in our plans are located toward the
beginning of the training block, while later portions are devoted to more
half-marathon-specific workouts. This may seem counterintuitive when
considering our emphasis on building fitness from the bottom up. However,
if speed workouts are executed at the right speeds, it makes sense to include
them closer to the beginning of your training cycle. As in other workouts,
correct pacing is essential. You will notice that partway through the
program, speed work transitions to strength workouts. While runners often
--- PAGE 68 ---
worry they will lose the speed gains they have worked so hard to attain,
endurance runners (specifically those racing for 90 minutes or more) need
not fear. Recall that development of the elements we explain typically
occurs at paces above 80 percent of VO2max. With that said, the speed
workouts are shorter intervals ideally at 95–98 percent. The strength
workouts are closer to 80 percent but are much longer in duration. We will
discuss the strength workouts shortly, but it is important to note that the
speed workouts produce the gains, whereas the strength workouts maintain
the gains.
When many coaches discuss speed training, they are referring to work
that is done at 100 percent VO2max. In reality, running at 100 percent
VO2max pace can be maintained for only 3–8 minutes. If you are a
beginner, 3 minutes is likely more realistic, while an elite miler may be able
to continue for close to 8 minutes. Running your speed workouts at or
above 100 percent VO2max, however, causes the structural muscles to
begin to break down and forces your system to rely largely on anaerobic
sources. This overstresses the anaerobic system and doesn’t allow for the
positive aerobic adaptations you need to run a good half-marathon. Our
program bases speed work on 5K and 10K goal times, races that both last
much longer than 3–8 minutes. Rather than working at 100 percent
VO2max, you probably run these distances at 80–95 percent VO2max.
Unlike other plans, the Hansons Method instructs you to complete speed
workouts at slightly less than 100 percent VO2max pace in order to spur
maximum physiological adaptations. Go faster, and gains are nullified and
injuries are probable.
In addition to pace, the duration of the speed intervals is important.
Optimal duration lies between 2 and 8 minutes. If it is too short, the amount
of time spent at optimal intensity is minimized, and precious workout time
is wasted; if it is too long, lactic acid builds up, and you are too tired to
complete the workout at the desired pace. As a result, the length of speed
intervals should be adjusted to your ability and experience levels. For
example, a 400-meter repeat workout, with each interval lasting around 2
minutes, may be the perfect fit for a beginner. In contrast, the same workout
may take an advanced runner 25 percent less time to complete each 400-
meter repeat, therefore resulting in fewer benefits.
--- PAGE 69 ---
Recovery is another important part of speed sessions, providing the rest
you need to complete another interval. Guidelines for recovery generally
state that it should be between 50 and 100 percent of the repeat duration
time. For instance, if the repeat is 2 minutes in duration, the recovery
should be between 1 and 2 minutes. However, we tend to give beginners
longer recovery time at the start of the speed sessions to sustain them
throughout the entire workout. We assign recoveries by distance (e.g., 6 ×
800 with 400 jog recovery). This usually fits the guidelines for recovery
time, especially as the repeat distance increases. With the 12 × 400 meter
workout, the recovery time is a little longer. Because it is usually the first
speed workout in the segment, we want to ensure it can be completed. Plus
it just works better to keep runners moving forward, jogging during the
recovery; otherwise there is a tendency to stand around for a few minutes
before starting the next repeat.
With further training, recovery can be shortened as an athlete becomes
able to handle more work. When doing intervals, one can adjust either the
amount of work being done or the amount of recovery allowed. The amount
of work is in line with the mileage of the program, however, so we don’t
want to alter that. But as you become fit, the interval paces may begin to
feel easier. In that case, shortening the recovery will provide the same
stimulus as earlier in the program. Be aware, however, of running too hard.
This session is meant to focus on accumulating time within the desired
intensity range, not leave you so tired you can’t put in a quality effort. If
you run your repeats so hard that you aren’t able to jog during your
recovery time, you are unlikely to be able to run the next interval at the
desired pace. In the end, these speed sessions should total 3 miles of
running at that higher intensity, in addition to the warm-up, cooldown, and
recovery periods. If you can’t get through the intervals to hit 3 miles total,
you’re running too hard for your abilities and thereby missing out on
developing the specific adaptations discussed. That said, if you are a novice
runner and completely new to speed workouts, it’s better to run only some
of the workouts at correct pace than to not run them at all. There’s no
problem with building up to the scheduled mileage, as needed.
The speed sessions that are utilized throughout the Hansons Half-
Marathon Method are provided below. Typically, the schedules start with
the lower-duration repeats (10–12 × 400 m) and work up to the longer-
--- PAGE 70 ---
duration repeats (4 × 1200 m and 3 × 1600 m). Once the top of the ladder is
reached (from the shortest-duration workouts to the longest-duration
workouts), you are then free to do the workouts that fit best with your
optimal development. Most exercise physiologists agree that this optimal
development occurs with intervals that are 2–6 minutes in duration.
Anything shorter doesn’t stress VO2max enough, and anything longer tends
to stress it too much, creating undue fatigue. So let that be your guide. If the
1600 workout is well above that 6-minute threshold, don’t use it. Keep your
workouts in that 2–6 minute range per repeat.
For those new to speed work, we strongly encourage joining a local
running group. Coaches and more experienced runners can take the
guesswork and intimidation out of those first speed workouts by showing
you the ropes. When a client tells me he or she has a running group that
meets on a certain day during the week, I will do everything I can to
schedule that into the training. Additionally, a local track will be your best
friend during this phase because it is marked, consistent, and flat. If you are
driven by numbers, you can even check your pace every 100 meters to give
you nearly constant feedback. This means owning a watch is a must. While
your pacing will likely require some trial and error at the beginning, the
watch and marked track will help you keep your workouts at the right
speeds until pacing becomes second nature.
Here is a chart showing how the speed workouts build on each other. To
determine the correct pace for each speed workout, use the pace charts that
follow. Find your goal pace for 5K or 10K and run the designated interval
as close to that pace as possible. Remember, each session should include a
1- to 3-mile warm-up and cooldown.
--- PAGE 71 ---
SPEED PROGRESSION

--- PAGE 72 ---
speed workouts
400 REPEATS PACE CHART
 400 REPEATS
12 × 400 with jog
recovery for 50–100% of
interval time
Sessions should include a
warm-up and cooldown (1–3
mi. each).
--- PAGE 74 ---
speed workouts
600 REPEATS PACE CHART
 600 REPEATS
8 × 600 with jog
recovery for 50–100% of
interval time
Sessions should include a
warm-up and cooldown (1–3
mi. each).
--- PAGE 76 ---
speed workouts
800 REPEATS PACE CHART
 800 REPEATS
6 × 800 with jog
recovery for 50–100% of
interval time
Sessions should include a
warm-up and cooldown (1–3
mi. each).
--- PAGE 78 ---
speed workouts
1K REPEATS PACE CHART
 1K REPEATS
5 × 1K with jog recovery
for 50–100% of interval
time
Sessions should include a
warm-up and cooldown (1–3
mi. each).
--- PAGE 80 ---
speed workouts
1200 REPEATS PACE CHART
 1200 REPEATS
4 × 1200 with jog
recovery for 50–100% of
interval time
Sessions should include a
warm-up and cooldown (1–3
mi. each).
--- PAGE 82 ---
speed workouts
ladder PACE CHART
 LADDER
400-800-1200-1600-
1200-800-400 with jog
recovery for 50–100% of
interval time
Sessions should include a
warm-up and cooldown (1–3
mi. each).
--- PAGE 84 ---
speed workouts
1600 REPEATS PACE CHART
 1600 REPEATS
3 × 1600 with jog
recovery for 50–100% of
interval time
Sessions should include a
warm-up and cooldown (1–3
mi. each).
--- PAGE 86 ---
STRENGTH WORKOUTS
After spending a number of weeks performing periodic speed sessions, the
muscle fibers and physiological systems will have adapted and will be
ready for more endurance-specific adaptations. When strength workouts are
added to the schedule, the goal of training shifts from improving the
VO2max (along with anaerobic threshold) to maintaining the VO2max and
preparing the body to handle the fatigue associated with endurance running.
You’ll notice that at the same time the strength segment begins, the tempo
runs and the long runs become more substantial. At this point in the plan,
everything the runner is doing is focused solely on half-marathon
preparation.
When we talk about strength workouts, we aren’t referring to intense
sessions in the weight room, pumping iron and flexing muscles. Strength
workouts are still runs, but ones that emphasize volume at a slightly lower
intensity, with the goal of stressing the aerobic system at a high level. While
the speed sessions are designed to be short enough to avoid lactate
accumulation (even though intensity is very high), the strength sessions are
meant to force the runner to adapt to running longer distances with
moderate amounts of lactate accumulation.
Physiology of strength workouts
Over time, strength sessions improve anaerobic capacities, meaning you
will be able to tolerate higher levels of lactic acid and produce less of it at
higher intensities. While your body may have shut down in response to the
lactic acid buildup at the beginning of training, strength sessions help to
train your muscles to work through the discomfort of lactic acid
accumulation. Additionally, these workouts teach your exercising muscles
to get better at removing lactic acid, as well as improving your running
economy and allowing you to use less oxygen at the same effort. Strength
workouts also spur development of something called fractional utilization
of maximal capacity. In practical terms, this development allows a person to
run at a faster pace for a longer time, which leads to an increase in
anaerobic threshold. For the half-marathon, this means conserving glycogen
--- PAGE 87 ---
for those running more than 90 minutes for the race. For faster runners, it
means being able to tolerate moderate amounts of lactic acid and higher-
intensity running for longer amounts of time.
These adaptations all begin with an increase in the size of the heart’s
ventricle chamber. During a strength workout, the heart is required to pump
faster and with more force than during easier runs. It is not being worked
quite as hard as during a speed session, but it works at a fairly high intensity
for significantly longer. The end result is a stronger heart muscle with a
larger chamber area, which means an increased stroke volume. (The stroke
volume is the amount of blood pumped from the left ventricle per beat.)
This results in more blood being sent to the exercising muscles, hence
delivering more oxygen. In addition, strength workouts help to involve the
intermediate muscle fibers, increasing their oxidative capacities. Within the
muscles, less lactate ends up being produced at faster speeds, and the lactate
that is produced is recycled back into usable fuel. For practical reasons,
strength workouts are important because running at faster paces, especially
near anaerobic threshold, begins to feel easier, economy is improved, and
stamina is increased. As you can see, the benefits of strength workouts are
practically boundless.
The benefits of strength workouts include:
// improved lactate clearance
// improved lactate tolerance
// improved endurance at faster paces
// improved oxygen delivery (via stronger heart)
// improved running economy
Strength guidelines
For most runners, the strength repeats will fall somewhere between 60 and
80 percent of VO2max, which will be slower than the speed sessions. You
can stretch that out to 85–90 percent of VO2max for faster runners.
--- PAGE 88 ---
However, while the speed sessions are relatively short (e.g., 3 × 1600 m)
with moderate recovery, the strength sessions are double the volume (e.g., 6
miles of higher-intensity running) with much shorter relative recovery.
Strength workouts are designed to be run 10 seconds per mile faster than
goal race pace. If your goal half-marathon pace is 8:00 minutes per mile,
then your strength pace will be 7:50 per mile. The faster the runner, the
closer this corresponds to 10K pace, but for the novice, it is between goal
half-marathon pace and 10K pace, probably pretty close to 15K pace. Your
pace is indicated in Table 3.5. Faster runners will already be near that 10-
second number, and novice runners will likely be at a slightly slower pace.
While you practice half-marathon pace with the tempo runs, the strength
workouts are faster to get your body accustomed to the stress of lactic acid
buildup, stressing the anaerobic threshold, which happens to coincide with
the 10-second-faster pace (or half-marathon pace). This faster overall time
will bring along with it a large increase in lactic acid. Even though the
strength workout may not feel hard from an intensity standpoint, the
volume, coupled with short recovery periods, is enough to stimulate lactic
acid accumulation and make way for positive adaptations. Refer to Table
3.4 for a quick guide to strength sessions.

--- PAGE 89 ---
As mentioned earlier, recovery is key to the success of these strength
sessions. To maintain a certain level of lactic acid, the recovery is kept to a
fraction of the repeat duration. For instance, the 6 × 1-mile strength
workout calls for a recovery jog of a quarter mile between each interval. If
the repeats are to be done at 8:00-minute pace, the quarter-mile jog will end
up being between 2:30 and 3:00 minutes of jogging, totaling less than 50
percent of the duration of the intervals. Because these are less intense
intervals than the speed intervals, you may be tempted to exceed the
prescribed pace, but keep in mind that the adaptations you’re looking for
specifically occur at that speed, no faster.
These strength workouts cover a lot of ground, so try to locate a marked
bike path or loop on which to execute them. While a track can be used, the
workouts get monotonous and injury is more likely, due to the increased
torque on the lower legs from turning so often. Remember to always add
1.5 to 3 miles for a warm-up and a cooldown.
Begin with 1 mile and progress each week to the next longer distance.
Once all workouts have been completed, proceed back down the distances.
Basically, you will begin with 1-mile intervals, progress to 3-mile intervals,
then work back down to 1-mile intervals. To determine the correct pace for
each strength workout, use the pace charts that follow. Find your goal half-
marathon pace and run the designated interval as close to that pace as
possible.
--- PAGE 90 ---
STRENGTH PROGRESSION

--- PAGE 91 ---
strength workouts
1-mile REPEATS PACE CHART
 1-MILE REPEATS
3 × 1 miles with 800 jog
recovery
Sessions should include a warm-
up and cooldown (1–3 mi. each).
--- PAGE 93 ---
strength workouts
1.5-mile REPEATS PACE CHART
 1.5-MILE REPEATS
4 × 1.5 miles with 800 jog
recovery
Sessions should include a warm-
up and cooldown (1–3 mi. each).
--- PAGE 95 ---
strength workouts
2-mile REPEATS PACE CHART
 2-MILE REPEATS
3 × 2 miles with 800 jog
recovery
Sessions should include a warm-
up and cooldown (1–3 mi. each).
--- PAGE 97 ---
strength workouts
3-mile REPEATS PACE CHART
 3-MILE REPEATS
2 × 3 miles with 800 jog
recovery
Sessions should include a warm-
up and cooldown (1–3 mi. each).
--- PAGE 99 ---
TEMPO WORKOUTS
Tempo runs have long been a staple of all good endurance training plans, so
most experienced runners have encountered them before. Tempo runs have
been defined in numerous ways, but in the Hansons Half-Marathon Method,
they are defined as race pace runs. Over the course of training, your tempo
runs will span a number of months, requiring you to maintain race pace
through an assortment of challenges and circumstances.
Internalizing pace is one of the most difficult training components for
runners to master. If you feel great at the start line and go out 30 seconds
per mile faster than you planned, you’ll likely hit the halfway point ready to
throw in the towel. No significant half-marathon records have ever been set
via a positive split (running the second half of the race slower than the first
half). In fact, nearly every world record, regardless of distance, has been set
using negative or even splits. The good news is that half-marathon tempo
training runs are quite fast, making them harder to mistakenly hammer than,
say, the relatively slower marathon tempo runs. However, remember this: If
you want to have a successful half-marathon performance, you are better off
maintaining a steady pace throughout the entire race rather than following
the “fly and die” method. Tempo runs teach you an important skill: control.
Even when the pace feels easy, these runs train you to hold back and
maintain. Additionally, tempo runs provide a great staging ground for
experimenting with different fluids, gels, and other nutritionals. Because
tempo runs have you running at your intended half-marathon pace, you get
a very good idea of what your body can and cannot handle. The same goes
for your gear. Use the tempo runs as dress rehearsals to try various shoes
and outfits to determine what is most comfortable. Regardless of training,
these details can make or break your race; tempo runs provide perfect
opportunities to fine-tune your race day plans.
Physiology of tempo workouts
In the same way that easy and long runs improve endurance, so do tempo
runs. Specifically, tempo runs improve race-specific endurance. Although
they are faster than easy runs, they are well under anaerobic threshold and
--- PAGE 100 ---
thus provide many of the same adaptations. Too, the benefits of longer
tempo runs mimic those of long runs, since the aerobic system is worked in
similar ways. Specifically, from a physiological standpoint, the tempo run
has a great positive impact on running economy at your goal race pace. One
of the most visible benefits of this is increased endurance throughout a long
race. Indeed, as during the long run, the ability to burn fat is highly
specified during tempo runs. The run is just fast enough that the aerobic
system is challenged to keep up with a high percentage of fat oxidation, but
it’s slow enough that the mitochondria and supporting fibers can barely
keep up.
Over time, it is the tempo run that will indicate whether or not you have
selected the right half-marathon goal. We have always considered this
workout more telling than any other. Because the tempo run offers no break
between intervals or rest periods, if you continually struggle to hit the
correct pace for long tempo runs, there will be some question as to whether
you can hold that pace for an entire race.
The greatest benefit that these workouts offer is the opportunity to
firmly learn your desired race pace through repetition. With time, your body
figures out a way to internalize how that pace feels, eventually making it
second nature. When runners cannot tell if they are close to pace, the
tendency is to be off pace (usually too fast), setting them up for unavoidable
doom. Learning your pace and knowing how it feels can make the
difference between a good race and a bad race.
The benefits of tempo work include:
// helps you to internalize half-marathon goal pace
// teaches you to control and maintain pace
// chance to experiment with nutrition, hydration, gear
// improved running economy at goal pace
// improved endurance
--- PAGE 101 ---
Tempo workout guidelines
In the Hansons Half-Marathon Method, the tempo run is completed at goal
race pace. For many other coaches, a tempo run is much shorter, at paces
closer to strength pace, but for our purposes, tempo and half-marathon
paces are interchangeable. You should run at goal pace, even early on when
it may feel easy. It will take a good number of tempo workouts before you
fully internalize the pace and can regulate your runs based on feel. What
does change throughout training is the distance of these workouts. Tempo
runs are progressively longer, with an adjustment every few weeks; they
increase from 3 miles for a beginner and 5 miles for an advanced runner to
7 miles over the last few weeks of training. As an advanced runner begins
to reach the heaviest mileage, the total volume of a tempo run, along with a
warm-up and a cooldown, can reach 12–14 miles and approach 90 minutes
in length.
With the long run looming after a tempo run, that 12-miler might look a
lot tougher than it did initially. Remember the principle of cumulative
fatigue? This is a prime example of how the Hansons Method employs it.
Suddenly that fairly easy longer run mimics the fatigue you will feel during
the later portion of the half-marathon. Rather than sending you into the long
run feeling fresh, we try to simulate those last miles of the half-marathon,
and there’s nothing like a tempo run to put a little fatigue in your legs.
--- PAGE 102 ---
TEMPO PROGRESSION FOR BEGINNER RUNNERS
TEMPO PROGRESSION FOR ADVANCED RUNNERS

--- PAGE 103 ---
tempo workout
tempo PACE CHART
 5–10 MILES
Sessions should include a warm-
up and cooldown (1–3 mi. each).
--- PAGE 105 ---
How to pace workouts
To help you further understand the intensity at which you should be running
during the various workouts in the training plan, check out Figure 3.3. The
diagonal line represents a sample VO2max of a runner. The first line on the
left is for the easy running days and represents everything under the aerobic
threshold; it is the largest but also the slowest area. The next line is the long
run and represents the fastest paces a person should run for the long run, but
it could also represent the fastest of easy days for beginners. The middle
line denotes ideal tempo pace and, therefore, half-marathon goal pace. It is
above aerobic threshold but below anaerobic threshold. The strength line
represents the high end of the “lactate” section, as strength runs should fall
just below anaerobic threshold. Finally, there is the speed line, which
represents where speed workouts should fall, which is just below VO2max.
--- PAGE 106 ---
As VO2max and running speed increase, thresholds and zones can be
indicated.
1. Easy pace zone
2. Moderate pace zone
3. Marathon pace zone
4. Tempo pace zone (half-marathon pace)
5. Strength pace zone (10–15K pace)
6. Speed pace zone (5–10K pace)
With this continuum in mind, it becomes clear why running faster than
you’re instructed to run compromises development. Not only do you miss
out on the benefits the workout was meant to provide when you go too fast,
but you also increase fatigue. The essential point is this: Paces are there for
--- PAGE 107 ---
a specific reason. While some runners feel that paces hold them back, in
reality proper pacing will propel you forward in the end. Fight the
temptation to buy into the “If some is good, more is better” mentality, and
keep in mind the specific goal of each particular workout.
The taper
While it may seem counterintuitive at best and like a waste of time at worst,
believe me when I say that cutting mileage and intensity is an integral part
of half-marathon training when done at the right times. When you reach the
final stretch of training, your goal is to recover from all that work you have
put in, while also maintaining the improvements you made over the past
few months. Reducing your training at this point, called tapering, is one of
the keys to successful racing.
The mistake many runners make with their taper is that they cut
everything, including mileage, workouts, intensity, and easy days. In the
same way we instruct you not to add these components too soon, we also
suggest not abruptly cutting them out. When runners subtract too much
training too quickly, they often feel sluggish and even more fatigued than
they did when they were in their peak training days. By cutting the training
back gradually, you’ll feel fresh and ready to race.
An SOS workout takes about 10 days to demonstrate the physiological
improvement. That’s right, it takes more than a week before you reap any
benefits from a hard run. Just as important to consider, the immediate effect
of a hard workout is fatigue. So if you try to do something after a hard
effort, you are just digging yourself a hole. Yet, if you wait too long, the
benefits have come and gone. If you look at the training plans in the
Hansons Method, you’ll notice that the last SOS workout is done 10 days
prior to the half-marathon because after that point, SOS workouts will do
nothing but make you tired for the big day. We also implement roughly a
50–55 percent reduction in overall volume (depending on which schedule
you are following) during the last 7 days of the program. Despite this, you
will still run the same number of days per week, with only the daily mileage
reduced. For a parallel, consider how you would feel if you were
accustomed to drinking a couple of cups of coffee in the morning and then
--- PAGE 108 ---
suddenly gave it up cold turkey. Your body probably would react with a dull
headache. If instead you cut back to one cup, you limit the effects of
withdrawal and usually end up feeling better. This is the same idea—reduce
the stress while keeping the body happy and in its preestablished routine.
By continuing to run fewer miles, but still running the same number of
days, you reduce the number of variables that are adjusted. Instead of
reducing frequency, volume, and intensity, you are tinkering only with the
last two. The problem with many training plans is that they cut too much
out of the schedule and prescribe a lengthy taper, causing a runner to lose
some of those hard-earned fitness gains. By subscribing to a 10-day gentle
taper period, you cut down on the risk of losing any of those gains but still
allow adequate time for rest and recovery.
From a physiological standpoint, the taper fits well with the principle of
cumulative fatigue because the training program does not allow you to
completely recover until you reach those final 10 days. Over the last couple
of months of the program, some of the good hormones, enzymes, and
functions in your body have been suppressed through incomplete recovery,
while the by-products of fatigue have simultaneously been building. With
reduced intensity and volume during the taper, these good functions
flourish. Meanwhile, the by-products are allowed to completely break
down, and the body is left in a state of readiness for your best performance.
We always warn runners not to underestimate the power of the taper. If you
are worried about your ability to run a complete half-marathon at the pace
of your tempo runs, consider this: The taper can elicit improvements of up
to 3 percent. That is the difference between a 2:00 half-marathon and a 1:58
half-marathon. It is a bit like getting something for nothing. And at this
stage of my career, a nearly 2-minute improvement in my half-marathon
best would be amazing.
Training intensity chart
To be utilized in determining how fast to run your workouts, Table 3.5
demonstrates pace per mile based on various goal half-marathon times. For
easy runs, refer to the easy aerobic A and easy aerobic B columns. The
faster end of the long run spectrum is indicated in the moderate aerobic
--- PAGE 109 ---
column. The marathon column is useful for those who have marathon
experience and are looking to come back down to the half-marathon. It’s
really more for comparison purposes than anything. The half-marathon pace
is the speed at which your tempo runs should be run. The strength column
will be your reference for strength workouts, and the 10K and 5K columns
for your speed workouts. Keep in mind that actual 5K and 10K race times
will be more accurate than this chart. If you have raced those distances, use
your finishing times to guide your speed workouts. Our goal here is to
provide you with some guidance for your workouts, keeping you focused
and making the correct physiological adaptations throughout training.

--- PAGE 111 ---
4
Hansons training plans
WHEN I THINK OF the half-marathon, I don’t think of half the distance
of a marathon, or half the work needed to complete it. Rather, the half
distance has a strong identity of its own, one that demands respect and a
serious commitment to training. In a way, the half-marathon is like the
melting pot of the running world or like a bridge across the gap between the
10K race distance and the full marathon. For runners who have already
been through the marathon journey, it’s a road going back to a perhaps
forgotten time of faster training. This can present a challenge. For those
who haven’t ventured to the marathon distance yet but would like to, the
half is a landing zone that makes that faraway goal of a marathon seem
more attainable.
When Keith and Kevin set out to create the Hansons Method of training
for long-distance races, they did so with average runners in mind, hoping to
give them an alternative to the status quo programs already in existence.
Since that time, thousands of runners have used our programs and found
great success, a testament not only to Kevin and Keith’s coaching know-
how but also to the programs themselves.
In this chapter you will find not only our Beginner Program and
Advanced Program but also our Just Finish Program. Read through these
descriptions to decide which program is the best fit for your experience and
ability levels. Miles logged, training history, ambition, and race experience
are all key factors in deciding which level will suit you best. Whichever
program you choose, if you follow it faithfully, you can expect to reach
your half-marathon goal.
--- PAGE 112 ---
One important caveat for those choosing the Beginner or Advanced
Program: If you have never run a race of any distance, or even trained
consistently, such as running at least 10–15 miles per week for at least 3
straight weeks, you should first evaluate your readiness to begin one of the
two plans. Bypassing shorter races such as 5Ks and 10Ks is not
recommended. We suggest that true novices first dedicate a bit of training to
shorter races, as well as up their base miles, before jumping into these half-
marathon programs. While the Beginner Program has some base miles built
into the beginning, it will only help you if you come into training with some
kind of base of your own. What we offer here will get you to your goals, but
make no mistake: The programs are not easy. And without a proper buildup
of mileage, you will set yourself up for potential injury or overtraining. The
exception here is the Just Finish Program, which I will discuss in more
detail later in this chapter.
The Beginner Program
The Beginner Program takes the runner from 10 miles per week and builds
to the upper 40s during peak weeks. Although we name this the Beginner
Program, it is not designed for the absolute running newbie. It works well
for someone who is new to half-marathoning but has some experience and
mileage under his or her belt, such as a runner who has run mileage in the
--- PAGE 113 ---
30 mile per week range and run a variety of 5K and 10K races but never a
half. We also recommend this plan to experienced runners who have
previously tackled the 13.1-mile distance but done so with a minimal-type
training program. Not uncommonly, some runners have run a half-marathon
before but have done so using a program aimed at simply finishing, and
they have trained by doing the smallest amount possible. For them, the
Beginner Program (Table 4.1) may be more advanced than what they
trained with previously, making it the appropriate next progression in their
training.
Finally, if you haven’t run higher mileage before, this program may be a
good fit.
The initial 4 weeks of the Beginner Program are designed to simply
build your weekly mileage. It’s all about time on your feet and miles
logged. The best way to bank mileage safely is to reduce intensity (no SOS
workouts) and spread a moderate amount of mileage over a number of days.
It is during these first 4 weeks that the body adapts to the stress of regular
training, preparing it for the next phase. For runners coming to the Beginner
Program who are already logging weekly mileage closer to that specified in
the 3rd or 4th week of training, just keep doing what you are doing and let
the training catch up with you.
Following the 4-week base phase, we begin to turn up the heat or,
rather, the intensity. You will notice two new additions: speed and tempo.
The speed workouts are executed at 5K or 10K pace (refer to Chapter 3 for
specific workouts). These workouts include 12 × 400 repeats, 8 × 600
repeats, 6 × 800 repeats, and beyond. We throw different types of workouts
at you both to keep things interesting and to achieve the desired
physiological adaptations. While you will only run a total of 3 miles at
these faster paces, the total mileage for the day will be greater once you add
in the recovery intervals and a warm-up and a cooldown. Runners using the
Beginner Program should warm up and cool down for 1–2 miles (which
adds 2–4 miles to your workout). This remains one of the most important
parts of training throughout the program because warming up and cooling
down help to boost performance and speed up the recovery process
following workouts.
Some will question why the speed-oriented training block is scheduled
prior to other phases, such as strength. In addition to the important
--- PAGE 114 ---
physiological adaptations that occur as a result of speed training, it gives a
beginner an excellent opportunity to establish a baseline. If you don’t have
any idea what pace you should be shooting for in the half-marathon,
complete several speed workouts, and you will soon find out. For runners
who have never run a 5K (or haven’t done so in the recent past), much less
a half-marathon, we encourage you to sign up for a 5K or 10K race.
Optimally, adjust your training plan slightly so that you get a race in during
the 8th week of your plan, 3 weeks into your speed work (see Table 5.1).
This will help you determine an appropriate training goal for the half-
marathon-specific training block that is approaching in coming weeks.
Speed workouts also make great dress rehearsals for the strength
sessions. They allow you to make mistakes and learn lessons about pacing
and recovery early on before starting those important half-marathon-
specific workouts. Finally, speed workouts help a runner develop supreme
mental toughness. For those who are accustomed to lacing up their shoes
and heading out the door for the same low-key 30- to 60-minute jog each
day, speed workouts provide a new challenge, for both the mind and the
body. These sessions force you to run at a higher intensity for a longer time,
drawing you out of your comfort zone and into new territory. Remember,
the only way to improve fitness is by bumping it up from the bottom; each
time you step slightly out of your comfort zone, your body responds to the
new stimulus. When you learn to tolerate discomfort for longer and longer
durations, the payoff is multifold: You gain speed, discover your true
potential, and become comfortable with higher-intensity training. What’s
more, you also develop a higher anaerobic threshold and aerobic capacity
without ever training beyond VO2max and risking injury.
Around the time we add speed to the training schedule, tempo workouts
also come into play. Assisting in self-regulation and pacing, tempo runs are
to be completed at goal half-marathon pace. Just as before and after speed
workouts, you should complete a 1- to 2-mile warm-up and cooldown with
tempo runs. Thus, in the end, although a tempo run itself may be 5 miles,
the total mileage will be closer to 7–9 miles. As the tempo distance
increases, these workouts total somewhere in the neighborhood of 8–11
miles, 6–7 of which are at goal half-marathon pace. You may be surprised
by the ease with which you complete the first few tempo runs, since they
--- PAGE 115 ---
are fairly short. As they get longer, however, you probably will find it
tougher to sustain that half-marathon pace. Just remind yourself that this is
excellent practice and is getting you ready for race day!
Once you have begun to master speed and tempo, you approach the
more half-marathon-specific training. At this point in the program, the
speed workouts give way to strength workouts, and the tempo runs become
much longer. The long runs also peak in mileage, and the weekly volume is
at its highest. We won’t sugarcoat this phase; it is difficult, and you will be
tired. You’ll find that strength workouts are similar in structure to speed
sessions, with the main differences being in volume and pace. While speed
workouts totaled around 3 miles with the speed at a 5–10K pace, strength
workouts hit 6 miles and are completed at goal half-marathon pace minus
10 seconds per mile. For instance, if your goal half-marathon pace is 10:00
minutes per mile, your strength workout pace will be 9:50 per mile. For
specific speed and strength workouts, refer to Chapter 3.
As we alluded, this final section of SOS training is meant to be difficult
and leave you feeling somewhat drained. That being said, you’ve adhered to
the principle of cumulative fatigue all along, so your body will be
accustomed to handling new challenges on tired legs. Of course you want to
avoid entering this section overtrained. If you ran the previous blocks too
hard, you won’t have any fuel in the tank to tackle strength sessions.
Through this section of training, the improvements will come from the
higher weekly volume, which is why it is particularly important to stick to
the paces we advise. Running too fast during high-mileage weeks is sure to
leave you injured or burned-out.
You’ll notice that the long runs are placed consistently throughout the
program, although they get longer as you get further into training. It is this
aspect of the program, the long run, that sparks the most questions, in
particular about their progression and frequency. Following several weeks
of shorter easy runs, we begin with a 10-mile Sunday long run, increasing
that run by no more than 2 miles from one week to the next. These
increases are proportionate to the scheduled weekly mileage, meaning the
long run makes up about 25 percent of the weekly mileage throughout the
program. As the tempo runs begin to increase, so too do the long runs. For
instance, during a week with a 10- to 12-mile long run, there is also a tempo
run of 5–6 miles, but with warm-up and cooldown, that day will also total
--- PAGE 116 ---
close to 10 miles. The reason we have a long run one week and a regular
training run the next week is to accommodate those longer tempo runs.
Without this adjustment, you’d essentially end up doing three long runs
every 8 days for more than a month, throwing off the balance of training
and increasing your risk of injury. By doing a more traditional higher-
mileage long run every 2 weeks, your body learns to handle the larger
volume while still running at least one run per week of significant volume.
The icing on the half-marathon training cake is the easiest section of the
program: the taper. After all that hard training, the body is fatigued. There
may have been moments when you wondered if you’d even complete the
training. The purpose of this last block is to finally let the body recover
from the previous 16 weeks, all while maintaining the fitness that was
gained. We don’t want you feeling fresh during the majority of training, but
the opposite is true during these last 10 days before the big race. This is
your time to get a little rest but also to hold on to all those positive
adaptations your body has made up to this point.
--- PAGE 119 ---
The Advanced Program
The Advanced Program is best suited for runners who have completed at
least one previous half-marathon. However, if you are a higher-mileage
--- PAGE 120 ---
runner and have plenty of experience at shorter distances yet are new to the
13.1-mile distance, you may still be a candidate for the Advanced Program.
It is important to consider your experience. If your past training has
involved low weekly mileage plus a high-mileage long run, as suggested by
many training programs, you may need to make some adjustments to the
Advanced Program; these will be discussed at the end of the chapter. As
indicated in the Beginner Program section, some runners who are used to
lower mileage may struggle with the Advanced Program due to its
aggressive structure and higher volume. That said, a runner who has never
completed a half-marathon but is accustomed to 50 or more miles per week
will likely thrive using the Advanced Program.
The Advanced Program (Table 4.3) differs from the Beginner Program
in several ways, the most obvious being weekly mileage. From the very
first week, the Advanced Program doles out more miles, and it continues to
follow that trend throughout. While we coach beginners to hit around 45
miles in their peak weeks, advanced half-marathoners are instructed to
reach just over 55 miles. It is important to note that the increase in mileage
doesn’t come from an increase in SOS workouts but instead from ramping
up the distance of weekday easy runs. Remember that the easy runs provide
a strong stimulus for aerobic development through mitochondrial growth
and development, muscle fiber recruitment, and the enhancement of fat use.
These benefits are all garnered without the stress that comes along with
harder running.
There are also noticeable differences between plans when it comes to
the long run. The Advanced Program brings a runner to 14 miles, while the
Beginner Program peaks at 12 miles. Too, the structure and buildup are
distinct for each of these programs. For instance, a 10-mile run in the
Beginner Program is labeled as a long run, but in the Advanced Program it
is simply an easy run. Looking at Table 4.2, it is clear that a 10-mile run for
a beginner is more significant than for an advanced runner.
--- PAGE 121 ---
You will also find that SOS workouts begin earlier in the Advanced
Program. In the Beginner Program, the runner starts with a base-building
period that consists of all easy running; in the Advanced Program, speed
workouts begin the first full week, along with the tempo runs. Speed is
included early in this program because half-marathon runners are often also
training for other races simultaneously. Ideally these races are shorter (such
as running a 5K, then a 10K, then your goal half-marathon distance). By
doing speed work early, these runners can enter these additional races with
a solid fitness level and have a fairly good idea of where they are in their
training. When they switch over to the strength segment, they are ready for
the race-specific work necessary for their goal half-marathon race.
To get into speed workouts, follow the sequence provided in Chapter 3.
Begin with the 12 × 400 workouts, then the 8 × 600s, 6 × 800s, 5 × 1000s, 4
× 1200s, and finally the 3 × 1600 workout. When you get to this point, you
have 4 remaining weeks of speed. At that point, work back down the
pyramid and do the 4 × 1200s, 5 × 1000s, and 6 × 800s, finishing the last
week of the speed segment with the 12 × 400 workout.
In addition to the earlier implementation of speed workouts, the
Advanced Program differs slightly in its prescription of tempo workouts.
While the Beginner Program jumps from a 3-mile to a 6-mile tempo run,
the advanced version goes a mile longer, to 7 miles.

--- PAGE 124 ---
The Just Finish Program
The Just Finish Program was born out of our desire to offer a sound
program that would allow even the absolute novice runner a solid program
--- PAGE 125 ---
to follow and thus to feel completely confident going into that goal race.
This confidence is particularly important if this is your first half-marathon.
Kevin, Keith, and I have worked with a wide variety of runners over the
years. One of the biggest and most enthusiastic groups that we coach are
charity runners. Their cause is noble, and my work with, for example, the
American Cancer Society’s Determination team fueled my desire to include
this program level in this book. Often, these runners are running not for
themselves but for a friend, spouse, or family member. They are doing it for
a reason that is bigger than themselves, which earns my respect any day.
While this group is the inspiration for the Just Finish Program, the program
is also a great option for anyone looking to simply complete the half-
marathon distance in a noncompetitive way.
The program operates on a simple premise: The easiest way to increase
mileage is to take away the intensity. When you add intensity, you greatly
increase the risk of injury. So, the focus of this program is on building a
runner’s general endurance to a point where the 13.1 miles can be covered
safely and with confidence. Put another way, you must build the foundation
before starting on the rest of the house. The runner who is using this
program needs to completely and soundly build a general endurance
foundation before even thinking about walls, a roof, and a sweet infinity
pool.
So, when you look at the program, you will see no SOS workouts on
Tuesdays and Thursdays. You will see long runs beginning in Week 8; that
is one piece of the puzzle that no half-marathon trainee, regardless of
experience level, can avoid. The long run is essential to building general
endurance especially when the focus is learning to cover ground at a
comfortable pace.
Do not overthink this schedule. It is meant to be free-flowing and a
learning experience. So, when you follow it, run to some degree by feel. If
you feel great one day, go ahead and run a little harder. If you don’t feel as
good, run slow enough to make sure you can cover the distance. If you went
out too fast, slow down, take a walk break—just keep moving! The long
runs should be slow and comfortable. Ideally you are building to a point
where you can cover the ground without stopping. The true end goal of this
program is to provide a building block for something more aggressive or
competitive down the line if you so desire, or at least to help you enjoy a
--- PAGE 126 ---
positive, fruitful training experience even if this ends up being the only
half-marathon you ever do. You should be able to follow this schedule and
finish strong at your race. Afterward, we hope you see it as a starting point
to a long future of running and competing in races.

--- PAGE 129 ---
Training programs FAQs
In our training clinics, we encounter many of the same questions regarding
preparation, year after year. The truth is, we all have similar fears and
apprehensions when it comes to taking on a new challenge. As coaches, we
have learned through the years how best to answer those questions, sending
the runner away feeling more confident about being able to fit in all the
training. Whether you choose to subscribe to the Just Finish Program, the
Beginner Program, or the Advanced Program, consider the following most
frequently asked questions.
WHAT IF I WANT TO SWITCH DAYS AROUND?
We understand that running frequently takes a backseat to work and family
responsibilities. While we hope you can bump half-marathon training up the
priority list for several months, it’s not realistic to expect it to be at the very
top. As you may have noticed, SOS workouts are scheduled for Tuesdays,
Thursdays, and Sundays. If you are not able to complete a workout on the
day it was prescribed, it is okay to switch days around to accommodate
your schedule. If you decide to do this, however, make sure that the switch
makes sense. For instance, speed workouts are scheduled on Tuesdays. If
you know that you are always going to struggle getting those workouts in
on Tuesdays because of meetings, kids, or other commitments, change all
your speed workouts to Mondays. If you make this change, you should also
move back the other workouts, doing your long runs on Saturdays instead
of Sundays, and so forth. This keeps the schedule consistent, merely
shifting it back, thereby avoiding any alterations in the training itself. The
goal is to avoid putting in back-to-back SOS workouts as much as possible
because the aim is cumulative fatigue, not reaching the point of no return. If
you find yourself in this situation, move your SOS days around to allow for
an easy day or a day off in between each.
--- PAGE 130 ---
WHAT IF I WANT TO RUN MORE WEEKLY MILEAGE?
Many runners assume that if they want to increase weekly mileage, tacking
miles onto the long run is the obvious choice; however, we caution that
tinkering with the long run is the last thing you should do. If you want to
add mileage, increase easy days to 10 miles or more or simply run easy on
the scheduled off day. For more on this, refer to Chapter 5.
WHAT IF I WANT TO RACE DURING THE TRAINING
PROGRAM?
Racing during a half-marathon training program is more feasible than when
training for a full marathon. Beginner and new runners are actually
encouraged to race at least once, completing a 5K or 10K race to establish a
baseline for SOS workouts. For those who already have these baselines but
simply love to race, we say go for it. My only caution is to not let other
races take away from your training. I have had clients who want to race
every week or every other week and who then wonder why their half-
marathon was a debacle. The most likely reason is that racing all the time
can cause you to miss many of the workouts, which are designed to work in
concert and take you to your goal on race day. So racing should be done
sparingly enough to satisfy your craving but not take away from the big
picture. To alter training for a week: Replace the midweek tempo run with
an easy day that was originally prescribed for the weekend. If the race is on
Saturday, run easy on Sunday, and then pick up the regular training
schedule on Monday. If the race is on Sunday, run easy on Monday. Assess
how you feel on Tuesday before picking back up with the schedule. If you
feel good enough, do the workout as planned. If not, replace the SOS on
Tuesday with a longer easy run, then pick up with the scheduled tempo on
Thursday. You may also consider doing your scheduled speed or strength
work on Thursday instead of the tempo run (since the race counts as a
tempo run), then pick the schedule back up as planned on Friday. You can
see how, if you do race too frequently, a whole training cycle can become
compromised. For more on this, see Chapter 5.
HOW MUCH SHOULD I WARM UP AND COOL DOWN?
--- PAGE 131 ---
Traditionally we recommend a 1- to 2-mile warm-up and cooldown before
and after hard workouts. For most beginners, this takes 15–20 minutes.
More advanced runners looking for an easy way to increase weekly mileage
may benefit from increasing both the warm-up and the cooldown to 1.5–3
miles.
WHAT IF I WANT TO TAKE A DAY OFF BECAUSE I FEEL
TIRED?
If this is the case, you should first determine whether you are injured or
simply fatigued. In training, we all experience aches and pains. In fact,
many runners just don’t feel that great when they’re logging high mileage.
Feeling somewhat worn-out is a normal and necessary part of the process. If
you find you are getting tired, make sure your easy days are truly easy and
you aren’t cheating your SOS paces down. If you are injured, however,
you’ll want to consult a coach or physician on what course of action to take.
WHAT IF I DON’T HAVE TIME TO DO THE WHOLE WORKOUT?
This can become an increasing problem as the tempo runs get longer and
the strength workouts begin because, at this point, training requires more of
your time. If there just aren’t enough hours in the day, do what you can.
Remember, something is always better than nothing. If the schedule shows
a 10-mile tempo run but you have time for only 6 miles, then do 6 miles.
You’ll certainly garner greater benefits from doing a 6-mile tempo run than
from doing nothing at all.
WHAT IF I WANT TO SWITCH MY WORKOUT DAYS AROUND?
The most frequent requests I get are to move the tempo workout to Friday
or the speed/strength workout to Monday, or the off day to some other day.
It’s perfectly fine to make these changes. The training plans schedule the
day off on Wednesdays because Wednesday was traditionally clinic day
during our fall marathon program. These clinics were held in the evenings,
which meant most people had to choose between either doing a run or
attending the clinic. To sidestep this conflict, Wednesday became the
programs’ day off from running. If this does not work for you, however,
--- PAGE 132 ---
feel free to move workout days around. The only rule is to have at least one
rest or easy day between SOS days. A common switch is doing the tempo
run on Friday to have another day of recovery between that and the
speed/strength workout on Tuesday. That’s a simple switch because it only
requires that you reverse the Thursday and Friday runs, without adjusting
anything else.
--- PAGE 133 ---
5
Program modifications
WHEN I WROTE MY first book, Hansons Marathon Method, I wasn’t
married, had no kids, and had all the time in the world to focus on writing.
Now, a couple years later, I juggle coaching, running, writing, and quality
time with my wife and young daughter. It’s downright chaotic at times. I’m
no different than most of you, so I certainly realize how hard it can be to
make time to train along with all that we have going on in our lives. A great
support system helps. And a good program, and coach for that matter,
should be reasonably flexible, recognizing that life happens while we train
and that sometimes runs need to be moved around or adjusted. A good
program will allow for such adjustments with minimal overall “damage” to
the person’s training. Let’s discuss some of the common issues that come up
and how you can work around these to make the Hansons Half-Marathon
Method work for you.
Increasing weekly mileage
Our programs fit a wide range of time goals and abilities; however, we still
receive some requests for information on how to add to the weekly volume.
As we have discussed, the faster a runner wants to complete the half-
marathon, the more training he or she will have to put in (to a point). That
added training generally comes in the form of an increase in weekly
mileage. If you are a first-time half-marathoner following the Just Finish
Program, you are probably better off sticking with the recommended
mileage for your first 13.1-mile training journey. If, on the other hand, you
have never raced the half distance but have some experience with shorter
race distances, the Beginner Program probably has the right mileage for
you. It will give you that all-important increase in weekly mileage without
--- PAGE 134 ---
throwing too much at you at once. Even if you have been successful in
shorter races, running high mileage is an entirely different beast. So if you
haven’t run high weekly volume, give the Beginner Program a shot for your
first half-marathon and then slowly add mileage or move up to the
Advanced Program for your second attempt at the distance, depending on
how your body responds.
If you are experienced in the half-marathon distance and are following
the Advanced Program, adding mileage becomes a bit more complicated.
While the intuitive choice may be to add to the long run, we first suggest
running on your rest days to add mileage. If you are looking to ramp up
your weekly mileage, we recommend adding an easy 4–8 miles on
Wednesday, your rest day, and voilà! You instantly see roughly a 10 percent
increase in mileage. For many runners, an easy running day, rather than a
rest day, placed between the two SOS days may actually better stimulate
recovery and uphold the routine.
Another approach for adding mileage is through the modification of
easy days in the Advanced Program, most of which have runs of 4–6 miles.
It is reasonable for an experienced half-marathoner to increase those runs to
6–8 miles. By adding 2 miles to each easy run during the week, you bank an
additional 8 miles per week, topping you out in the 60 miles per week
range. We have successfully used this approach with a number of
competitive men and women who run in the low 1:30s and sub-1:30-hour
range.
A final method for adding mileage to the Advanced Program is to
increase the distance of the long run. We don’t recommend throwing in an
18- or 20-mile long run just for the sake of doing it, however. With the half-
marathon distance, the rules remain in line with our overall philosophy,
which means keeping your long run at 25–30 percent of weekly mileage
and less than 3 hours. Your longest long run is already longer than the race
distance, so being able to cover the ground on race day should not be a
concern. However, our programs offer plenty of room between where the
long runs sit and where they could max out if you have already increased
your weekly mileage by using the other ideas just discussed.
For the ambitious few who have slowly increased their mileage and are
looking to safely hit that 70–80 miles per week range, we again suggest
adding miles to easy days, making those runs at least 10 miles each. If you
--- PAGE 135 ---
run all 7 days per week, with 4 easy days, that will total 40 miles per week,
or 40–50 percent of your goal. In this scenario, strength workouts total 11
miles, and we usually recommend adding a 3-mile warm-up and cooldown
before and after to log a few extra miles. Including the warm-up and
cooldown, tempo runs will peak at around 13 total miles, and we suggest
increasing the Saturday run to 6–10 miles. Then, when you add in an 18- to
20-mile long run, you’ve got about 95–100 miles on your legs for the week.
However, unless you are looking at running a half-marathon in the sub-1:15
range, these changes are probably not realistic.
Runners will also often ask us about running twice a day. As with the
long run, our recommendation depends on the person. For most people, it’s
hard enough to find time to run once a day, let alone twice. If you are
looking to add up to 10 miles per week, then it’s usually easier to just add
Wednesday as an easy run. Then you are left with only a few miles to
account for, and it’s simpler to just add a mile to a run a couple of times
during the week. For those running 70–80 miles per week, an 8- to 10-mile
run will take anywhere from an hour to 80 minutes (e.g., 10 miles @
8:00/mile). For people who are running that sort of mileage and looking to
finish in 1:05–1:20 in the half-marathon, a 10-mile run is not a major run.
Even in this scenario, a second run may still not make a lot of sense. In this
case, easy runs of 8–10 miles added to the SOS will already put you well
into the 70–80 miles per week range. After a person is running more than
10 miles a day, however, two runs per day should be considered. At that
point you are talking about 14–15 miles, or more, per day. It may not seem
like much, compared with 10 miles of single runs, but at this level, those 4–
5 extra miles put in during a second run can elicit real physiological
adaptations.
In Appendix A, we discuss the plan followed by the elite athletes in the
Hansons-Brooks Distance Project. Here you can garner some ideas on how
higher weekly volume can be broken up. To reach the coveted 100-mile
mark, you can either increase your easy runs from 10 miles to 12 miles,
which will give you an extra 6 miles per week, or you can add a second 4-
mile run a couple of days a week. All this mileage is added without messing
with the volume or intensity of the core SOS workouts, demonstrating what
huge gains added easy mileage can spur on its own.
--- PAGE 136 ---
Adjusting for races
One of the most common reasons runners require a change in their training
program is to accommodate races. While we generally suggest including
other races sparingly leading up to a half-marathon, in certain situations
such competitions are advantageous. In particular, we have discussed the
benefits of beginners racing a 5K or 10K to help establish a baseline for
their half-marathon-specific training. For this race to be useful, you must
schedule it strategically. For a number of reasons, the first and best
opportunity is at the end of Week 7 in any of the programs. The first 4
weeks are spent increasing base mileage to prepare you to handle harder-
intensity running; this is followed by the speed segment of training, along
with increasing mileage. Because it takes about 3 weeks to adjust to new
training stressors, it makes sense to schedule a race at that 7-week point.
With the Just Finish Program, a race gives you an opportunity to see where
your fitness is at and decide if you want to establish a time goal.
As far as race planning around your half-marathon, I would suggest a
5K during the speed cycle and a 10K during the strength cycle. That way,
you are (1) building your race distance throughout the training cycle and (2)
racing a distance that won’t take away from your other training. A 5K
during the earlier training weeks would be about what your Thursday tempo
run distance would be. During the later stage of the training block, a 10K
would be around the tempo distance. So, you get to race and not lose out on
an SOS day.
The training grid (Table 5.1) demonstrates more specifically how you
might shift around your workouts to best accommodate a race. You’ll notice
that during the week, Thursday’s tempo run is replaced by Saturday’s easy
run, while the Friday run remains the same. Saturday is then race day,
which replaces the tempo run. This is a strategic replacement because both
a race and a tempo run stimulate the anaerobic threshold. Hence, the
Sunday run is replaced by another easy run that is longer in duration.
Beyond that week, the schedule picks up again right where it left off.
--- PAGE 137 ---
This example and the previous discussion in Chapter 4 demonstrate why
it is important not to race too often, regardless of whether you’re using the
Just Finish, Beginner, or Advanced Program. Races cause big adjustments
in the tempo runs, long runs, and sometimes both. While the impact is not
as strong early in the training, it becomes a larger issue the closer you get to
your half-marathon. Each runner has to weigh his or her own pros and cons
of racing sparingly or often. If you are not overly concerned with your
finish time in the half-marathon, then the number of times you race
beforehand matters less. On the other hand, if the half is your ultimate goal
and you are chasing a time, then you want to choose races sparingly, paying
close attention to their timing in your training program.
Adjusting for conflicts
Prior to any structured training, many runners are fairly haphazard in their
approach to running, putting in varying amounts of volume and intensity
depending on mood, weather, and the like. While any exercise is obviously
good for your body, training requires more focus and strategy. Herein lies
one of the greatest challenges in following a structured training program:
scheduling conflicts. For instance, your child’s T-ball games are on
--- PAGE 138 ---
Thursdays, the same day you are supposed to do your tempo workouts. Or
maybe you have to work every Sunday, which is also the scheduled long
run day. As coaches, we find ourselves reassuring runners about these
issues every marathon cycle. By giving you three simple guidelines for
working around life’s obligations, we offer you the tools to tend to your
responsibilities without letting your running get off track.
GUIDELINE 1: MAINTAIN REGULARITY IN TRAINING
If you decide to switch your workouts around, stay as consistent as
possible. For instance, if you trade Thursday’s workout for Friday’s one
week, try to do the same every week moving forward. The key is to avoid
constantly swapping different days every week. If you move your strength
workout to Friday one week, but then do another strength workout the
following Tuesday, you’ve done two strength workouts within a 5-day
period. This not only upsets the training balance but also can lead to injury
and overtraining. If you know something is going to regularly conflict on a
certain day of the week, make sure the changes are uniform across weeks
and months. If you work all day Sunday, switch your long runs to Saturdays
throughout the entire training cycle. Routine is the key here. The more you
can maintain it, the better.
GUIDELINE 2: ENSURE REST DAYS AND EASY DAYS REMAIN
IN PLACE
Put simply, you should always take either an easy day or a rest day between
SOS workouts. If you miss your speed workout on Tuesday and complete it
on Wednesday instead and then go right into your tempo run on Thursday,
you’re asking for an injury. In this situation, the best bet is to move the
tempo run to Friday, leaving an easy run on Saturday and a long run on
Sunday. This shows that you can adjust for certain obligations and
disruptions without upsetting the entire balance of training.
GUIDELINE 3: SOMETHING IS ALWAYS BETTER THAN
NOTHING
--- PAGE 139 ---
Consider the previous example in which an SOS workout was missed on
Tuesday. What’s a runner to do if there is no other possible day to
reschedule the workout later in the week? One option is to just move on.
That’s right, cut your losses and move on to the next SOS workout. In some
circumstances, there may be no way around this scenario. If you don’t have
time to get in the full workout, however, the other option is to consider
sneaking in a quick run, or abbreviating the workout, getting in what you
can. Even a 25-minute run is better than forgoing a workout altogether.
Adjusting for illness or injury
Illness and injury are certainly the most frustrating reasons you may need to
adjust your training around. Over the weeks to months you spend preparing
for the 13.1-mile distance, you are likely, at the very least, to catch a bug.
The chance of injury, on the other hand, is largely avoided through smart
training, but it is not entirely eliminated. Even when you’re doing
everything right, you can trip on a curb and take a spill or roll an ankle on
uneven terrain. Here is how to navigate these potential running layoffs,
depending on the number of days missed and when these days are missed.
1 TO 2 DAYS MISSED
Maybe you tweaked your knee or were sick in bed for a couple of days. If
you come out unscathed after a day or two, training can resume normally
without scaling back mileage or intensity. You just lose a couple of days of
running—no harm done. For example, if you took a wrong step at the end
of your long run on Sunday, causing you to miss training on Monday and
Tuesday, simply jump back in on Wednesday. If you are feeling 100
percent, complete Tuesday’s SOS workout on Wednesday and move the
Thursday tempo to Friday. This allows you to still fit in all of the week’s
SOS workouts, but it also adheres to the rule of scheduling an easy or rest
day between hard runs. However, if you aren’t able to reschedule your SOS
days to fit within those parameters, then just forge ahead with your tempo
run on Thursday and let go of the missed SOS workout. While a number of
--- PAGE 140 ---
missed workouts can spell doom for your marathon goals, a single lost
workout will never be your demise.
3 TO 6 DAYS MISSED
Physiological regression will be minimal, even if no running at all takes
place within this time frame. Usually, a person who misses this many days
has something more than a 24-hour flu or a simple ache or pain. With that
said, if you are feeling healthy enough to get in a couple of short, easy jogs
while you recuperate, by all means do so. If instead you’re truly laid up, rest
assured that the consequences of a few days off won’t deter your end goal.
After 3–4 days of missed training, come back slowly by running easy for 2–
3 days, then pick the schedule back up and follow it as usual. If you have
missed 5–6 days, run easy for 3–4 days and then revert to the previous
week’s training regimen. After that week, jump ahead and catch back up
with the training program. For instance, if you miss Week 3, run easy
through Week 4 and then return to Week 3’s workouts during the 5th week.
After that, jump to Week 6 and follow the training as it was originally
prescribed.
7 TO 10 DAYS MISSED
At this point the body starts to lose some of those hard-earned physiological
gains you have made. You’ve probably heard the saying “You lose it twice
as fast as you gain it.” It always seems that it takes a lot more time and
effort to gain fitness than it does to lose it. Taking a week and a half off
from running definitely necessitates serious schedule modification;
however, that modification depends on the point in the plan at which the
missed block occurs. If it occurs before the strength portion of the training
program, then the runner won’t have to make any major adjustments to race
goals. If the setback happens after the strength workouts begin, the runner
will probably need to adjust race goals because there may not be enough
time to get in all the normal training. Keep in mind that if you can still
manage to run some short, easy runs during this period and have the go-
ahead from your doctor, the time it takes to return to normal training will be
significantly less. If running isn’t possible, commit to crosstraining to
--- PAGE 141 ---
prevent a drop-off in fitness. The hope is that fitness will remain high
enough to allow an easier and faster transition back to healthy running.
Always remember in these situations to consult a physician who is familiar
with runners before diagnosing yourself and prescribing your own
treatment. In either case, you don’t need to abandon your plans to run the
half-marathon, but adjustments are necessary.
Upon your return to running, you should run easy for the same number
of days that you missed. If you lost a week, then run easy for a week. After
that, go back to the last training week that you were able to complete and
repeat it, then run the week that was originally missed, and from there pick
the schedule back up. So, with a week missed, it takes 3 weeks to get back
on track. If you are able to run easy during your time off, subtract a week
from that time frame. This advice applies throughout the training program,
but once strength workouts have begun, you may do the math and realize,
“Wow! I don’t have enough time.” Unfortunately, this happens. While many
people can rebound quickly enough to run the race, their goal time will be
compromised. Once you get into that final 4–6 weeks of training, the pros
and cons of racing should be weighed. If you are really looking to run that
goal time and you miss 10 days of running with 5 weeks to go, you could
choose to look at other race options. If you are comfortable with potentially
missing the mark, then go for it.
MORE THAN 10 DAYS MISSED
Unfortunately, if you are forced to miss this much time, you are faced with
a serious decision. After 2 weeks of lost training, the decreases in
physiological gains are quite significant—as much as 3–5 percent. While
this might not seem like much, consider this: For a runner attempting a
2:00-hour half-marathon, a 4 percent loss means an increase of nearly 5
minutes for the overall finishing time. The slower the race goal time, the
more time gained. Even worse, after 21 days away from running, 10 percent
or more of fitness is forfeited. This means that VO2max and blood volume
can decrease by up to 10 percent, anaerobic threshold decreases
significantly, and muscle glycogen decreases by as much as 30 percent.
These are all important to endurance performance, and if you miss 2 weeks
of running, it may take more than 2 weeks to even get back to your previous
--- PAGE 142 ---
level, setting you far off course. In particular, if this happens during the
strength portion of the program, there simply may not be enough time to
regain your fitness levels and get ready for the goal race. If you are
following the Just Finish Program, you don’t have a designated strength
portion, but you will still be in the hardest part of your training at this time,
so the guidelines here are still applicable.
Although you won’t run your best, advanced runners in this situation
may be able to sneak in shorter training segments and still complete the
race, albeit likely falling short of the original time goals. However,
beginners and first-time half-marathon runners should be cautious when it
comes to losing substantial amounts of training time and forging ahead to
the goal race. For runners in this situation, consider choosing a new race or
at least revising time goals. In all our years of coaching, we’ve seen too
many people rush back from illness or injury to make a race deadline, often
forgoing proper recovery and in the end having a poor race experience.
If you are set on running the originally scheduled race, be sure to step
back and understand what the time off from running means for you
physiologically. If you’ve taken 2 weeks off, adjust your race goal by 3–5
percent. If you’ve missed closer to 3 weeks, adjust your expected
performance by 7–10 percent. For example, if Runner A missed 2 weeks of
training and was shooting for a 2:00 half-marathon, she should adjust her
goal by 3.6 minutes (120 × 0.03) to 6 minutes (120 × 0.05). The new time
goal would then be 2:03–2:06. Any more than 4 weeks off, and we suggest
choosing a new race altogether.
DOWNTIME DISCRETION
Although we have just presented a number of ways to modify your training
schedule, we contend that it is best to avoid taking unscheduled days away
from training if at all possible. This applies even when your legs are tired
and sore, since soreness and injury are not inextricably linked. There will be
times during training when your legs are achy, fatigued, and nonspecifically
sore; it just comes with the territory. Many of the adaptations that happen
during training occur as a result of running on the days you just don’t feel
like running.
--- PAGE 143 ---
If you have an injury, however, your response should be different. For
less severe injuries, make sure that you are not only taking time off but also
using that time to identify the root cause of the problem. Otherwise you
may continue to run into the same issue upon returning to training. For
instance, if you are experiencing shin splints, figure out what you need to
do to reduce the pain, like getting new shoes or implementing a strength
routine. If your body will allow it, reduce the volume and intensity, but
continue running short and easy through the healing process. While training
may need to be reduced, it doesn’t necessarily have to stop completely to
allow for recovery, that is, if the cause of the injury is identified and treated.
When you can maintain some fitness, downtime is significantly minimized,
and regular training can be resumed much sooner.
--- PAGE 145 ---
6
Selecting race goals
BY THIS POINT IN the book, you have learned about the different
training programs and chosen the one that best suits your experience and
objectives. Congratulations! That is half the battle! However, once you’ve
decided which training program you are going to follow, it’s time to identify
your race goals. Goals vary among runners, but it’s important to set a goal
that is in line with what half-marathon training demands. Some runners
simply hope to finish the race, some want to cross it off their “bucket list,”
and some are looking to run as a means of raising money for charity. On the
other end of the spectrum are runners hoping to maximize what they can get
out of their body, run as fast as possible, or earn a place on the podium. The
beauty of this sport is that all these athletes begin on the same starting line
—from those who promised themselves to lose a little weight all the way to
someone chasing down a world record. The common factor is that they all
have a goal for that race, and it affects how they train.
Borrowing from the business world, we suggest setting SMART goals:
goals that are specific, measurable, attainable, realistic, and timely. A
specific goal is one that is defined and clear-cut, so rather than stating that
you hope to finish a half-marathon, you identify an actual time goal. (If you
follow the Just Finish Program, a precise time goal isn’t necessary, but if
you can get an idea of the time you would be happy running, it gives your
runs more purpose.) By setting a measurable goal, such as 1:45, you give
yourself a definite objective. You also want to be sure that your goal is
attainable. While a 1:45 half-marathon may be within reach for someone
who previously ran a 2:00, it may not be for someone who holds a 2:45
personal record (PR). Similarly, a realistic goal is one that considers your
physical abilities and scheduling constraints. If you are only going to have
time to train 4 days a week, it is unlikely you’ll be able to achieve a 1:40
half-marathon. Finally, a timely goal is one that is contained within a
--- PAGE 146 ---
specific time frame. This one is easy because you automatically have the
period between the start of the training plan and the moment the gun fires at
your chosen race. By following the SMART criteria, you are more likely to
achieve your predetermined objectives going into a race.
In a perfect world, we would encourage runners new to the 13.1-mile
distance to set smaller goals before considering a half-marathon. When
runners slowly move up the race ladder from a 5K, to a 10K, to a half-
marathon, they build their aerobic capacity and tolerance to increased
training volumes. What’s more, the shorter races provide a solid baseline
for half-marathon training, giving feedback for what a reasonable race goal
might be.
If you are looking to simply cross the finish line by any means
necessary, then the Hansons Just Finish Program is probably the best fit for
you. This program is far more loosely structured than the other plans, but
that doesn’t mean you will be taking it easy. You will be running solid
weekly mileage and building your general endurance. A great goal for those
following this program is not only to get across that finish line but to do so
feeling as strong as possible. A time goal isn’t mandatory, but I encourage
developing a loose time goal as the program progresses. Having some sort
of time goal will help you gauge if you are running too fast or too slow
during your daily runs, in comparison with what you would like to attempt
on race day.
On the other hand, the Beginner Program and the Advanced Program
are more focused and structured. By nailing down a specific time goal
within one of these programs, you are able to identify precisely how you
should train in order to achieve that mark. More than training you to just
make it across the finish line, we give you the tools to execute the half-
marathon distance successfully, while also leaving your love for running
and hunger for competition intact. The goals you set will give you a starting
point for training by guiding your workouts and providing a tangible target
to shoot for throughout your half-marathon preparation.
Time goals can be determined in various ways. Sometimes, runners seek
a qualifying time for a certain race, such as a time that will gain them
access to a desirable start line corral at a major half-marathon. This is the
easiest type of goal to pinpoint because the standard is already set. For
runners who have previously completed the half-marathon distance, a new
--- PAGE 147 ---
PR is another popular time goal. We also frequently hear from many
runners who want to break the big barriers, such as the 3:00-hour, 2:00-
hour, and 1:30-hour marks. While we encourage you to set the bar high,
make sure your goal is manageable and keeps you engaged in your training.
There are several guidelines to consider as you zero in on a SMART half-
marathon goal.
Goal-setting guidance
CURRENT TRAINING AND PAST TRAINING
Your goals should be contingent on your current foundation of training. For
instance, someone who has been injured for the past 6 months will set
different goals than someone who has been consistently running 50 miles
per week during that same period. In the same way, the goals of a beginner
will vary dramatically from those of a seasoned half-marathon racer.
CURRENT PERSONAL BEST
If you have previously run a half-marathon on relatively low training
mileage, even a slight uptick in miles will probably lead to great jumps in
your personal best. However, if you are a 1:30 half-marathoner who has
been running 50–60 miles per week, improvements will be less substantial.
Consider these numbers: A 5 percent improvement for a 2:00 half-
marathoner is about 6 minutes, which would get that runner under the 1:55
mark. The same percentage of improvement for a 1:10 half-marathoner is
about 3:30 minutes, which would bring that person from being competitive
on a regional level to being a borderline national-class runner. Obviously,
that 5 percent improvement means different things, depending on one’s
pace.
TRAINING AND AVAILABILITY
The time you devote to training has a significant effect on the quality and
volume of the training and, thus, the final result. When choosing a goal,
--- PAGE 148 ---
look realistically at how much time you’ll have available to train. Time
determines not only how hard and long you can train on a day-to-day basis
but also how consistent you can be over a long period. For example, a
runner can perform quite adequately in local 5Ks or 10Ks by logging 25–30
miles per week, perhaps running 3 days with a long run of 1 hour. While
this works for shorter distances, this person would likely struggle to get in
adequate training for a half-marathon on that same timetable. With the half-
marathon distance, the recommended mileage is 30 miles per week for a
less seasoned, slower runner and 40–50 miles per week for faster runners.
TRAINING WINDOW
The length of time until your goal race will offer some guidance in goal
setting. If you are a newer runner or new to the half-marathon distance, plan
for a longer buildup period before you attempt 13.1 miles. Having a base of
miles is important in helping you start your training strong. The Beginner
Program and the Just Finish Program do have a few weeks built into the
front end that allow you to build a small base. For veterans who train
consistently, however, the half-marathon-specific training can be shorter
because you have an established mileage base. This assumed base is why in
our Advanced Program, SOS days begin right away in the training plan.
Some runners prefer a slower buildup; others choose a short, intense
training segment.
EXTERNAL FACTORS
When setting your half-marathon goal, keep in mind that outside factors
such as terrain, temperature, and race size all have the potential to affect
your performance on race day. If you are accustomed to training in cool, dry
conditions, but your chosen goal race is likely to be hot and humid, adjust
your final time goal. Also check the course profile; you might want to
predict a slightly faster time on a flat course and a somewhat slower time on
a course with an abundance of hills. Finally, if you are running a large half-
marathon and find yourself stuck behind a large crowd in one of the last
corrals, you may want to tack on a few extra minutes. Even though your
--- PAGE 149 ---
chip won’t begin timing until you cross the start line, your time may be
affected by a slower mass of runners in front of you.
How to use a race equivalency chart
A race equivalency chart (Table 6.1) is a particularly handy tool for a runner
looking to pinpoint a realistic time goal based on current ability. This chart
allows you to take a recent race time and see what an equal performance
would be for an alternate distance. Instead of simply multiplying your pace
at a shorter distance by 13.1, you can use this chart to obtain an “equal
performance” prediction. As an example, according to the chart, if you ran a
23:00-minute 5K, you should be able to run a 1:46:19 half-marathon.
Because pace naturally slows with distance, the chart suggests what you’d
probably be capable of in an equal performance at a longer distance. If you
have run only marathons to date, use your marathon time and backtrack to
see what your half-marathon time would potentially be. Be sure not to
confuse this with a pace chart, which shows you what a certain pace will
equal for a given distance, such as the 5K, 10K, half-marathon, and
marathon.

--- PAGE 152 ---
If you don’t have a race time logged, another option is to complete a
field test by doing a time trial on a track. To do this, complete a short warm-
up as you would before any SOS workout. Then run 1 mile as fast as you
can at a steady, hard pace. Following your cooldown, find your time on the
race equivalency chart and check what might be a reasonable time goal for
the half-marathon. The longer the race or time trial, the more accurate the
half-marathon prediction is going to be. Unsurprisingly, a 10K will be a
better determinant than a 1-mile time trial. The best way to figure out an
appropriate goal is to plug in several times from varying distances and find
the range that they put you in. I have known a few runners who couldn’t use
shorter race distances as predictors because they could hold very close to
their best 5K pace all the way up to the half-marathon distance. Every
runner is different, so if you have several times available from different
distances, you will be able to more accurately predict a finishing time in the
half-marathon.
Regardless of the goal time, be sure to select it before you begin the
strength segment of the training program, which is when most of the half-
marathon-specific training is completed. That time goal provides a tangible
number on which to base those SOS workouts.
Adjusting goals
Although race equivalency charts are helpful, some runners find they need
to adjust their goal time once they get into training. If you overestimated
what you’d be capable of on race day, you’ll know for certain once you get
into longer tempo runs and strength runs. When you’re struggling to run a
6-mile tempo run at goal pace, it is safe to assume that the pace will be too
tough to hold for another 7 miles on race day. In this case, it is best to adjust
your goal time to a slightly slower finish to ensure that you have confidence
going into the race.
At the other end of the spectrum, some runners will want to set the bar
higher once they begin their SOS workouts. Perhaps you originally thought
--- PAGE 153 ---
a 2:00 half-marathon was reasonable, but workouts are going well, and you
now think 1:45 would be a more appropriate goal. This situation is tricky.
While we like to encourage runners to pursue their greatest potential, we
also don’t want to set them up for failure. If you become overzealous in
your training, you risk overtraining and injury, which means you might not
even get to the starting line, much less the finish. If you initially would have
been satisfied with your original time goal at the outset of training, why
jeopardize training by entering into uncharted territory? Especially with
race day nearing, ramping up training can spell disaster for a runner.
Always remember: You’ll run a better race slightly undertrained than you
will overtrained. In fact, many times the greatest battle is just getting to the
start line feeling healthy and fresh.
Other types of goals
In addition to your overall time goal, you may have other small goals you
want to reach along the way. For instance, many of the runners who attempt
one of our half-marathon programs have never run 30, 40, or 50 miles per
week; if this applies to you, your first incremental goals might be simply to
hit those marks. Reaching a weekly mileage goal can be a huge motivator,
especially when you are fatigued and questioning why you’re doing this in
the first place. You can also set goals related to supplemental training
(discussed in detail in the following chapter). Many runners find motivation
in setting targets for their crosstraining, stretching, and resistance training
routines. These goals may be as general as “I’m not going to skip any days
of running in the training program” or “I’m going to stretch after every
workout.” The higher your ultimate time goal, the more important these
variables become.
In the same way you should use the SMART goals strategy for your
race day goal, it can also be utilized to set your smaller goals along the way.
Be sure these goals are specific, measurable, attainable, realistic, and
timely. Goals of any sort narrow your focus and give meaning to your
training. Without them, runners are left to their own devices, which can
send training into a haphazard spiral. Give your goals some serious
--- PAGE 154 ---
consideration and begin by setting the small goals that will help you
achieve that ultimate time goal.
--- PAGE 155 ---
7Supplemental training
BY NOW, YOU’VE PROBABLY realized that we like mileage and we like running most days of the week. Torun your best half-marathon, you need to run. It is that simple. This philosophy is hard on those runners who liketo spend as much time doing other activities as they do running. We get that. But remember, this plan is acommitment you make for 18 weeks. When a goal is important, you make the time to do it right. All that said, asmentioned earlier, there is a time and rationale for including other activities in your race training. There are otherpursuits, such as crosstraining, flexibility, and strength training, that you can do in smaller quantities to boostperformance and prevent injury. The main idea here is that this additional training should be supplemental to andnot a replacement for the running. You want to focus on activities that support your training rather than hinder it;therefore, you have to be careful about what supplemental work you include. Implementing an appropriate amountof crosstraining, along with a bit of flexibility and strength work, however, can better your running performance,by allowing you to work on certain weaknesses that may be limiting your running potential, and also add variety toyour training.
Crosstraining
While crosstraining attracts a lot of attention in sports media, the Hansons Method limits its inclusion. Thereasoning is simple: The most direct path to becoming a better runner is through running. This notion follows abasic principle of physiology known as the rule of specificity. The idea is that your body adapts specifically to thestress it is placed under. A 30-minute swim is great for general fitness, but it doesn’t translate directly into goodrunning performance.So while crosstraining isn’t a major component in our programs, it can play a small but significant role in racepreparation. The most obvious reason to include alternate exercises is for rehabilitation after injury. If you findyourself injured, supplemental exercises can get you back on your feet faster by providing a reduced-weight-bearing activity, thereby allowing for increased blood flow to the injured area to promote tissue repair.Additionally, they help maintain cardiovascular fitness, which assists in your return to running. Indeed, sitting onthe couch waiting for something to heal isn’t the answer.The key to crosstraining during injury is to find an activity that mimics running as closely as possible, such asusing an elliptical or a stationary bike. While options like the rowing machine may provide a great cardiovascularworkout, the emphasis is placed on the upper body and won’t help the running muscles. It should be noted that theprotocol can vary based on the specific injury. If you have a broken foot, for instance, biking will only aggravatethe ailment further. Be cognizant of whether the activity affects the injured area and steer clear of anything thatcauses pain. That said, an antigravity treadmill can allow people with stress fractures to run, and do so safely.These can often be found at local sports clinics; if there is one in your area, I’d suggest checking it out.Another instance in which we might recommend crosstraining is during periods of planned downtime awayfrom running. For the half-marathon, it’s likely you won’t need two full weeks off following your race, which iswhat we normally prescribe for after a full marathon. However, the appropriate recovery time is highly individual.A person leaping out of his or her comfort zone to make it through a half may require a solid 10 days off, while aveteran runner may be able to get away with 5 days. The Hansons-Brooks team athletes take some sort of plannedbreak after all of our training segments. Planned recovery works wonders for the body! A hiatus can give runnerstime to restore damaged muscles, rejuvenate the spirit, and plan the next move. Cross-training offers theopportunity to enhance that recovery by providing a way to continue burning calories and maintain some of thefitness gained during half-marathon training.We are often asked about how many half-marathons a person can or should run in a year. Again, the answertends to be highly individual. For instance, those who were brand new to running at the beginning of half-marathon training may not want to do a second one for a very long time. They may prefer to return to shorter races
--- PAGE 156 ---
and build their overall fitness before making the decision to move up to the half again. Veteran runners with moremiles on their legs than their cars may decide to make three or four quality attempts at a half-marathon in a year.The beauty of the half distance is that you can race it and still run pretty well at 5Ks and 10Ks during yourtraining.The final reason we might prescribe crosstraining is to provide a beginner runner a means through which toease into the sport. For a person who has never run or isn’t already active, there is a limit to how many days he orshe can safely run, at least at the onset of training. Initially, this may be only 15 minutes at a time, 2 or 3 days aweek. In this situation, it is important to fill the other days with workouts on an elliptical or a bike, or even a walk.As general fitness improves, these crosstraining days can gradually be replaced with running. For most truebeginners, it can take several months to transition into running 5–6 days per week.We always tell runners in our training programs to consider their previous experience with a crosstrainingactivity and to stay away from new exercises until after the goal race. While you may be feeling fitter than everduring training, be sure to temper that zeal for exercise. You are already under enough physical stress leading up toyour half-marathon; adding a new activity to the mix just increases risk of injury and threatens to derail your focus.Runners most commonly want to add in crosstraining on Wednesdays, their day off from running. While cycling orPilates is great for your health in almost every other circumstance, these activities, being less productive andpotentially harmful, may only hinder recovery from running. If you always ride your bike to work and have beendoing so for years, by all means continue your routine, within reason. In this case, your body has already adaptedto that exercise. If it is a long ride, however, consider taking the bus on SOS workout days. If you were a Pilatesenthusiast before beginning hard training, you should cut down your practice but not necessarily eliminate it. Justremember: Don’t start anything new until after the goal race.The other guide to deciding whether or not to cross-train is your body itself. If you are having troublerecovering from running workouts, you definitely shouldn’t be piling on supplemental training. In addition, if youthink you may be overtraining, replacing running with a crosstraining activity isn’t the answer either. If that is thecase, you would benefit more from a day off so you can return to running feeling fresh the following day. Weoccasionally encounter runners who claim that they simply can’t handle higher mileage and therefore need tocross-train. Before automatically sending them to the elliptical to replace running mileage, I take a hard look at thepaces they are running, the shoes they are wearing, the races they are doing, and anything else that couldpotentially be sabotaging their running. More often than not, it is a training issue. It has been our experience that ifthe training schedule is controlled for how fast you are running, as the Hansons plans are, then the mileage willtake care of itself. Put another way, many people mistakenly hammer their mileage in programs with shorteroverall volume, which then limits their ability to adapt to higher mileage. Once in a while, a person just can’t seemto adapt to running mileage no matter what he or she does. If you find yourself in this boat, step back and weighthe pros and cons of your half-marathon goal. With that said, over the years we have encountered far more runnerswho struggle to remain healthy on programs that recommend low mileage and lengthy long runs than on themoderate weekly mileage and moderate long run volumes offered by the Hansons Method.
Flexibility
Although stretching has been linked to the sport of running since the jogging craze of the 1970s, the topic is morecomplex than most people realize. By itself, flexibility refers to the maximal static (not moving) range of motionfor a particular joint. The more flexible a person is throughout his or her joint range of motion, the easier it is tostretch the corresponding muscle. This makes for a more elastic muscle that is less prone to injury, but it alsomeans the muscle can’t create as much power as a less elastic muscle. Imagine a Stretch Armstrong doll; the moreyou pull his arm, the wimpier-looking he gets. In the same way, the farther you stretch a muscle, the less elasticpower it will have to fire. This is where active range of motion becomes important. This type of flexibility isconducted through a set of active movements that target the running joints and muscles. To properly implement aflexibility routine, you must understand the difference between these two types of stretching and when to utilizethem. While there has been conflicting research over the years, the latest and most convincing evidence suggeststhat there is a time and a place for both active (dynamic) and static stretching. For both performance and injuryprevention, it is important to do the right type of stretching at the right time.
DYNAMIC STRETCHING
--- PAGE 157 ---
This form of flexibility training involves rhythmic movement throughout a person’s full range of motion. Thesemotions are deliberate and controlled. One type of active stretching, often referred to as ballistic stretching, is fast-paced and bouncy, taking the joint beyond the natural range of motion. This can be fairly dangerous and put you atrisk for injury, so we generally suggest avoiding ballistic movements. Dynamic stretching, in contrast, focuses onproper form and motions that help to actively increase range of motion within reasonable parameters. Whenperformed after a warm-up and prior to a speed, strength, or tempo run, dynamic stretching benefits a runner in anumber of ways. First and foremost, the dynamic movements reduce muscle stiffness, which decreases the risk ofmuscular injury. They also help prepare the body to run faster by loosening you up without stretching your musclesto the point of reducing their power. In fact, dynamic stretching can actually stimulate fast-twitch and intermediatefibers that often get neglected during traditional run training. The other advantage of this type of stretching is itsinfluence on training the brain and the muscles to work in concert by engaging the muscle fibers and the nervoussystem simultaneously.To best put dynamic stretching into practice, warm up for 1–3 miles before a high-intensity workout and thenperform several of the following exercises. They should take no more than 10–20 minutes and are an easy way toimprove your entire workout. Pick and choose the exercises you like best and perform them in any order youprefer.  
--- PAGE 158 ---
1 arm swings
Standing tall with feet shoulder-width apart, swing your arms in a circular, clockwise motion, mimicking propellerblades on each side of your body. Avoid crossing your arms over your chest. Keep your back straight and kneesslightly bent. After 6–10 repetitions, swing the arms from the sides across your chest in a back-and-forth motionfor another 6–10 repetitions. These exercises help relax the major upper-body muscles, making your upper bodymore efficient during running. This is particularly advantageous because runners tend to carry tension in their armsand shoulders, which affects the rest of the stride.

--- PAGE 159 ---
2 side bends
Standing tall with feet shoulder-width apart and hands on the hips, lean smoothly from left to right, being carefulnot to lean backward or forward. As you lean, raise the hand from the opposite side above your head. Repeat 16–20 times. These bends will assist in keeping the spine mobile.

--- PAGE 160 ---
3 hip circles
Standing tall with feet shoulder-width apart and hands on the hips, begin by making circles with your hips, leaningas far forward and backward as comfortably possible. Perform 10–12 rotations in a counterclockwise motion andthen reverse direction for another 10–12 rotations. By opening up the hips, this exercise allows for a better range ofmotion in your stride.

--- PAGE 161 ---
4 half-squat
Standing tall with feet shoulder-width apart and hands on the hips or straight in front of you, bend at the knees asshown, then slowly straighten your legs to return to the starting position. Perform 10–12 times. The half-squat canhelp develop a higher leg lift, which improves your natural stride and helps you avoid shuffling and otherinefficiencies.

--- PAGE 162 ---
5 leg kicks
Stand with your left side next to a wall, placing your weight on your right leg (outside leg) and your left hand onthe wall. Swing your left leg forward and backward in a pendulum motion for a total of 10–12 repetitions. Reverseposition and do the same with your right leg.

--- PAGE 163 ---
6 leg swings
Stand facing a wall with both hands on the wall. Swing your right leg across the front of your body. Swing it as farto the left as you can move comfortably and then back to the right as far as you can move comfortably. Do 10–12times and then switch legs.

--- PAGE 164 ---
7 slow skipping
Skip slowly for 30–50 meters, or 10–15 seconds. Turn around and skip back to your starting position.

--- PAGE 165 ---
8 high knees
Following a straight line, jog slowly and focus on lifting your knees toward your chest in a marching fashion. Payattention to driving the knee toward the chest and also consider proper arm carriage and pumping rhythmicallywith the opposite knee. Proper arm carriage has arms bent at 90 degrees and moving back and forth as if on apendulum at the shoulder. The up-and-down actions should be quick, but your movement forward should be steadyand controlled. Travel down and back, 30–50 meters in each direction.

--- PAGE 166 ---
9 butt kicks
In this reverse motion of high knees, pull your heels back rapidly toward your buttocks. Again, the motions shouldbe quick, but your linear movement steady. Travel 30–50 meters, turn, and continue back to your starting position.

--- PAGE 167 ---
10cariocas
Also known as the “grapevine,” this is the trickiest of the exercises in terms of coordination. You can stand withyour arms perpendicular to your torso or, if more comfortable, with arms bent at your side. Stand with feetshoulder-width apart. Moving to the left, pull your right foot behind the left. Step the left out to the side. Thencross the right leg in front of the left and again step the left to the side. Basically, the legs twist around each otherwhile the torso remains still on the twisting pelvis. Travel 30–50 meters, turn, and continue with these steps as youtravel back to your starting position.

--- PAGE 168 ---
11bounders
These are a similar motion to the high knees, except instead of driving the knees high into the chest, the focusshifts to pushing off with the trailing leg and driving forward. It is a cross between a skip and high knees. Travel30–50 meters, turn, and continue these steps back to your starting position.

--- PAGE 169 ---
12sprints
At the end of your exercise routine, do 4–6 repetitions of a 75- to 100-meter sprint at near-maximal effort. Alwaysdo your fast running with the wind, so jog back against the wind to start a new sprint. The sprints shouldn’t bemore than 15 seconds, so slower runners should begin with 75-meter sprints.
--- PAGE 170 ---
The name of the game for exercises 5–12 is muscle engagement. By actively engaging the muscles and gettingthe neuromuscular connections firing, you are (1) preparing your body to run fast, (2) working on specific runningmotions that will aid in proper form development, and (3) developing a neuromuscular connection to fast andintermediate muscle fibers that will serve as a major advantage late in the half-marathon when your slow-twitchfibers are fried.
STATIC STRETCHING
When most people talk about stretching, they are referring to static flexibility. Unlike dynamic stretching, staticstretching is done standing or sitting still, rather than using an active motion. For years, runners have performedstatic stretching routines before workouts and races. Ironically, this is probably the worst time for this activity,since it reduces muscle force production by stretching the muscles out too much. The muscles lose their elasticityas they are stretched, making them less powerful and also putting you at risk for a muscle tear. Even so, there is aplace for static stretching in your training toolbox; you just have to know when and how to use it.There has been much research to support the use of static stretching after workouts as a means of injuryprevention. For instance, calf tightness has been shown to be associated with pronation of the rear foot, whichcauses the tibia and fibula (lower leg bones) to internally rotate, resulting in a pain that is commonly referred to asshin splints. More specifically, this kind of inflexibility can lead to tendinitis, stress fractures, Achilles tendoninjuries, and knee issues. Poor flexibility also tends to cause the front of the pelvis to tilt forward, creatingexcessive curvature in the lower back. The result is a tightening of the lower back muscles, which predisposes therunner to back injuries.While crosstraining and dynamic stretching can be utilized periodically, static stretching should be done on aregular basis to avoid these issues. Keep in mind that the research shows it takes a minimum of 3 weeks of“regular” stretching before improvements are seen, which often means doing such exercises every day, sometimestwice a day.Over time, a static stretching routine will help you gain and maintain better all-around flexibility, promoteinjury recovery, and improve running form, as well as relaxing the muscles and promoting maximal range ofmotion.The following stretches should be performed post-run, holding them for 20 seconds and doing 1–3 repetitionseach. Never stretch to the point of pain or until the muscle shakes; keep each movement slow and controlled.These stretches should be incorporated into your daily routine, taking about 10–15 minutes after your run. If youare in a post-run rush, the stretches can be done later in the day or evening, just not prior to a run.
--- PAGE 171 ---
1 low back
Lie flat on your back. Draw both legs toward the chest. For a stretch, place hands behind knees and pull kneesclose to the chest. This stretch will isolate the long back muscles that run from the pelvis to the shoulder blades.

--- PAGE 172 ---
2 shoulder
Stand upright with feet shoulder-width apart. Pull the right arm across the front of the body so that the arm isperpendicular to the torso. With the left hand on the elbow (or slightly above—toward the shoulder), gently pullthe right arm toward the left side. Repeat with the left arm. Much of the tension we carry ends up in the shoulders.Because many runners begin pulling their shoulders up when they get tired, poor form can result. If you have atight shoulder carriage to begin with, it can affect the way your arms swing, which will affect your runningefficiency.

--- PAGE 173 ---
3 chest
Standing upright facing an open doorway, place feet shoulder-width apart. One foot should be slightly in front ofthe other for balance. With your arms straight out from the body (you should look like a T), place your armsagainst the wall on either side of the doorway, palms touching the wall. Lean forward until you feel a gentle stretchin the pectoral muscles and biceps. Many runners tend to have very tight chest muscles that cause them to roll theirupper back (like a hunchback). This stretch helps prevent poor posture and form that can lead to inefficientrunning.

--- PAGE 174 ---
4 calves
Begin by standing a foot or two away from a wall and lean forward so your hands are bracing you against the wall.With the left foot stationary and bent, slide the right foot back another 12 inches. The right heel should be kept onthe ground. As your chest gets closer to the wall, slightly bend the right leg to stretch the other calf muscle. Repeatfor the left leg. Added flexibility in the calf muscles helps you to avoid potential pronation and tendon problems.

--- PAGE 175 ---
5 gluteal
Lie on your back on a soft, flat surface. Bend the left leg so that the knee is pointing upward but the foot is still flaton the floor. Next, fold the right leg and rest the ankle of that leg on the left knee. The right leg should beperpendicular to the left leg. With your hands interlocked at the back of your left thigh, pull the left knee towardthe chest as far as you comfortably can. Repeat on the opposite side.

--- PAGE 176 ---
6 groin
Start by standing upright with your feet more than shoulder-width apart. Lower the right hip in a squatting fashion,bending the right leg and keeping the left leg straight. For balance, place hands on the right knee, if you wish. Youshould feel the stretch along the inside of the left leg. Switch sides and repeat.

--- PAGE 177 ---
7 hamstrings
Sit on a soft, flat surface with legs extended in front of you. Bend the left knee so that the bottom of the left footrests along the inside of the right thigh. The right leg should be straight out from the body with a very slight bendat the knee. Slowly bend forward from the waist so that the stretch is truly focused on the hamstring muscle groupand not the upper back. Repeat with the right leg.

--- PAGE 179 ---
8 hip flexors/quads
Start by standing upright with your feet more than shoulder-width apart. Lower the right hip in a squatting fashion,bending the right leg and keeping the left leg straight. For balance, place hands on the right knee, if you wish. Youshould feel the stretch along the inside of the left leg. Switch sides and repeat.

--- PAGE 180 ---
9 hips
Sit on the floor with the left leg extended to the front. Cross the right leg over the left leg. The right foot will be onthe outside of the left leg. Next, place the left arm so that the hand is on the outside (right side) of the right knee.The right arm should be a brace, positioned on the floor near the hip. Finally, twist to the right by using the leftarm as a lever against the right leg. Repeat on the opposite side.

--- PAGE 181 ---
The purpose behind stretches 5–9 is identical. The muscles in the pelvis are used for stability, but they can alsolimit range of motion. If these muscles are tight, the natural stride length is diminished, leading to a decrease inrunning economy. By keeping these muscles flexible and allowing for free range of motion, you maximize yournatural stride length.
Strength training
Strength (resistance) training is a form of supplemental work that some runners choose to utilize. Increasedstrength contributes to better running in a number of ways. First and foremost, it helps to improve form, especiallyin the upper body. It also can assist in preventing injuries through the protective effects of stronger muscles.Additionally, strength training helps to fight fatigue by training the body to be able to draw from fast-twitch fiberslate in an endurance event.A number of exercises belong under the strength training umbrella, including the drills described in theprevious section, core muscle training, and free weights. I often hear that runners avoid strength training becausethey are worried about putting on “bulk” and gaining weight. In reality, it is fairly difficult to add any significantmuscle mass onto your body weight. If the right exercises are done in the correct volumes, the average runnerwon’t have to worry about putting on extra pounds.Although there are many options for adding strength training to a running program, our basic philosophyinvolves three main ideas: (1) It complements the running regimen; lifting or other strength work should neverreplace running. (2) It helps correct weaknesses, muscle imbalances, and poor running form; in essence, strengthtraining should help to improve running performance. (3) It is short and simple; not only does redundancy occurwhen you commit yourself to a long, complicated strength routine, but you also take away valuable time from thereal goal, which is running. We understand that many people following this training plan work full-time and havemany other responsibilities. As a result, the exercises provided here are easy to do on your own without a gymmembership or fancy equipment. Simply choose two or three of these exercises to do after easy running days. 
--- PAGE 182 ---
1 crunch
Begin by lying on your back with your knees bent so that your feet are flat on the floor. Contract your abdominalmuscles to pull your trunk up. Many people use momentum to carry themselves up or use their legs to push off androll upward, but this does not provide the desired strength work. Instead, focus on small movements fromabdominal contractions. The total movement during the crunch may only be a few inches. Start off with 3 sets of10, progressing to 3 sets of 25 over the course of several weeks. At that point, increase either the number of sets orthe number of repetitions per set. The goal is to strengthen the abdominals, which are essential in maintainingrunning form and posture. Having strong abdominals makes it easier to tuck the pelvis underneath your body,improving stride through better body positioning.

--- PAGE 183 ---
2 back extension
Lie facedown on the floor, with the majority of your weight on your stomach. Extend both legs about shoulder-width apart, and extend your arms straight in front of you. You want to maintain a nearly straight line from yourfingers to your toes. Finally, contract the lower back muscles and square off your shoulders so that your entire backis straightened. Hold for 2–3 seconds and release. Repeat 12–15 times. During running, the back absorbs a lot offorce upon each foot strike; the stronger the back is, the better it will handle it.

--- PAGE 184 ---
3 superman
The Superman is similar to the back extension, but instead of simply contracting the back muscles in a stationaryposition, you lift one arm and the opposite leg. Lying facedown on top of an exercise ball, lift your left arm andright leg at the same time (you can’t lift both sides without rolling off the ball). This strengthens the arms, glutes,and back in one shot. Hold each contraction for 1 or 2 seconds before releasing. Repeat 12–15 times on each side.Having a strong upper back means less shoulder slouching, promoting proper posture and upper-body runningmotion.

--- PAGE 185 ---
4 bridge
Lie on the floor with both legs bent so that your heels are touching the floor. Rise up by contracting the glutes,back, and hamstring muscles. When this is done properly, you will be able to draw a straight line from the tops ofyour bent knees to your head. Hold each contraction for 1–3 seconds and perform 12–15 repetitions. As thisbecomes easier, you can try a one-legged version, with one leg bent and the other leg straight and raised off thefloor (as the bent leg is contracted). This is intended to strengthen the glutes and hamstrings, which are oftenweaker than the quads due to running. It also stretches the notoriously tight hip flexors.

--- PAGE 186 ---
5 side plank
Lie on your right side. Then bend your right arm so that the humerus bone, or the bone between the shoulder andelbow, is the “post” and your forearm is perpendicular to the rest of the body. Your right foot should rest on thefloor with your left foot on top of it. Raise your body off the floor. Don’t sag in the midsection or bend at the waist.Again, straight lines should be seen in all planes. Hold the position for 10–20 seconds and increase the time as youget stronger. This exercise helps to balance strength between the front and side abdominal muscles.

--- PAGE 187 ---
Together, these strength exercises offer an all-encompassing introduction to resistance training. Consideradding some to your running regimen, and you’ll surely notice a difference in a matter of weeks. While runningcan take up much of your time, strength training is a quick and easy way to potentially boost performance andward off injuries.
Final thoughts on stretching and flexibility
Consistency is the key to success with stretching and strength training. If you do the exercises described here onlyonce every few weeks, there’s no benefit to be gained. In fact, it just makes you more fatigued with no return oninvestment. So, if you chose to follow a strength and flexibility program, be consistent. Start with 1–2 days perweek for several days. Start with 1–2 sets of these exercises. After several weeks, assess where you are and add aday or add a set if that feels appropriate. Slowly adjust the workload to the point where you simply want tomaintain and not advance. Finally, start early in your training block or before it rather than throwing either of theseinto the middle of a training block.
--- PAGE 188 ---
8
Nutrition and hydration
WHEN I WAS 25, like many other twentysomething men and women, I
paid little heed to proper hydration and nutrition. I ate and drank what I
wanted or whatever was available, assuming that if I just trained hard, my
races would be fine. Sometimes they were but sometimes they weren’t, and
I know now that if I had considered details like nutrition, I could have
counted on more consistent and probably better results. Now, older and just
slightly wiser, I have learned firsthand how intricately related all of these
elements are. Training, performance, diet, and hydration are closely
intertwined. If you are off on one, the others will suffer; what’s worse, your
true potential will remain an unknown.
Fueling for the half distance differs from fueling for the marathon
because the degree to which it affects your race depends more on your pace.
In a shorter, faster run, there is less risk of physically running out of fuel
unless you have started with a low tank to begin with. However, runners
trying to crack a 3-hour barrier have to consider their fueling a lot like a
marathon runner would because they are in it for the long haul and face the
serious risk of “bonking,” or running out of stored carbohydrate, before
they reach the finish line.
Speed aside, diet matters. Whether you are a performance-based athlete
or are out there for fun and health, diet trends will certainly affect you, for
better or worse. So, no matter what your situation is, having a baseline of
nutritional education is a very useful weapon in your arsenal. While general
recommendations are provided here, it is important to seek out advice from
a physician or sports nutritionist for individualized guidance if you have a
specific concern.
--- PAGE 189 ---
Nutrition: Fueling to go the distance
Hard training requires consideration of three important aspects of nutrition:
consuming enough calories, consuming the right calories, and consuming
calories at the right times. Once you have these three things figured out,
you’ll be well on your way to building an optimal base of fuel for training
and racing.
CONSUMING ENOUGH CALORIES
Training for a half-marathon is a major undertaking, and your caloric needs
will be different than during periods of inactivity or casual exercise. By
taking in the appropriate amount of calories, you’ll maintain a healthy
weight and support your training. Large calorie deficits can sabotage your
training and performance, leading to issues such as overtraining, illness, and
injury. More important, overall health can be jeopardized. The athletes who
are afraid of eating too much tend to also be the ones who end up feeling
burned-out or injured, often as early as 6 weeks into hard training. This is
not a coincidence, of course, so ensure you are monitoring your calories and
taking in a sufficient number for your level of training.
Even if you are looking to lose a bit of weight during endurance
training, now is not the time to start a calorie-cutting diet. Generally
speaking, hard training alone tends to lend itself to slight weight losses over
the long term, without introducing any major dietary shifts. Remember that
in order to do that training in the first place, your body requires the proper
fuel to stay up and running. Consequently, skipped meals and severe calorie
restrictions (reductions of 1,000 calories or more) will greatly impede your
training and should be avoided. Such unhealthy diets will keep you from
running your best on a daily basis, diminishing your race performance.
Those who are running more for fitness than for a top race time can
consider coupling exercise with slight dietary restrictions. Remember,
however, that caloric deficits should be slight and weight loss will be slow.
These adjustments can be safely made while completing half-marathon
training, although I strongly recommend seeking out professional advice to
help you perform well, stay healthy, and lose weight all at the same time.
--- PAGE 190 ---
Calculating caloric needs
Here are two quick formulas that give you an idea of how many calories
(technically kilocalories, but we will use calories here) you need on a daily
basis. They are simple to use and accurate enough to give you a general
range indicating what is appropriate for you based on body weight and level
of exercise.
1. Light to moderately active (45–60 minutes of moderate activity, most
days of the week)
body weight × 16–20 cal./lb. = daily calories
2. Very active (60–120 minutes of moderate exercise, most days of the
week)
body weight × 21–25 cal./lb. = daily calories
For example, here is a caloric range for a 150-pound runner who
engages in 60 minutes of easy running per day:
150 lb. × 16 cal./lb. = 2,400 cal.
150 lb. × 20 cal./lb. = 3,000 cal.
This runner should consume between 2,400 and 3,000 calories per day.
We provide these two formulas with the expectation that you will use both
of them over the course of training because you will need to consume more
calories on your long run day than you will on a short, easy day. Let the
length of your run be your guide in choosing the equation that will yield the
number of calories you should consume on that particular day. Don’t obsess
over these numbers; they are meant to give you a general idea of the
number of calories you should be consuming. Over time, you’ll internalize
--- PAGE 191 ---
approximately how many calories you should take in and won’t need to
continue referring to the equations. If you weigh yourself regularly and at a
similar time each day, you will see trends in your weight over time. Use
those trends as your guide to caloric consumption.
Having worked with runners of various ages and levels of experience,
we find that most people tend to overestimate how many calories they need.
Generally speaking, males should use the middle to higher end of the
ranges, while women should refer to the middle to lower end. We often get
the question from aging runners, “Since I’m older, should I be consuming
fewer calories?” Again, generally speaking, men will typically need to cut
their caloric consumption by 10 calories for every year of age past 20, and
women should do so by 7 calories per year. These recommendations are
based on what happens physiologically in the context of a population that
tends to become increasingly sedentary with age. If activity levels remain
high throughout life, caloric modification can be minor.
Of course, it is not just about hitting a calorie number. Table 8.1 gives
you a general idea of how your caloric intake should be broken down into a
healthy, runner-friendly diet, indicating how much you should be eating
from the major food groups on a daily basis. As you get into training, extra
calories will come from sports drinks, bars, or gels that you are consuming
before, during, and after major workouts. While easy running days don’t
require such nutritionals, longer SOS workouts (more than 8 miles) are the
perfect staging ground to experiment with your race day fueling plan.
During these more race-specific workouts, you’ll have the chance to
determine which gels, chews, beans, or drinks work best to keep your body
running.
--- PAGE 192 ---
CONSUMING THE RIGHT CALORIES
Knowing how much to eat is only part of the picture. As you may have
guessed, not all calories are created equal. The numbers may be the same,
but the residual effects from eating 700 calories at a fast-food joint will vary
considerably from consuming 700 calories of home-cooked food sourced
from a local farmer’s market. Later in the chapter, we will discuss more
specifically what foods to eat and how best to time consumption, but first
let’s take a general look at the three sources from which our bodies draw for
energy: carbohydrates, fats, and protein. All are important for different
reasons and, in the right amounts, will keep you properly fueled for
everyday excellence.
Carbohydrates
When it comes to endurance nutrition, carbohydrates dominate the
discussion, as they should your diet, accounting for 60–70 percent of it, to
be exact. Over the last few years, however, they have received a bad rap, as
--- PAGE 193 ---
more than a few folks have tried to cash in on our country’s obsession with
dieting, specifically the promotion of low-carbohydrate regimens. It turns
out, however, that the conversation is somewhat misguided. To be sure,
there is no denying that we are in the midst of an obesity epidemic, placing
a major burden on people’s health as well as our nation’s economy. It is also
true that simple carbohydrates have largely contributed to this problem. But
here’s the caveat: There are two different types of carbohydrates, simple
and complex, and only one of them is detrimental to a person’s health when
consumed in excess. Simple carbohydrates come from refined grains, soda,
candy, and other processed foods, while complex carbohydrates are
contained in vegetables and whole grains such as oatmeal and brown rice.
Both types of carbohydrates should play a role in the diet of an endurance
athlete and will directly impact performance, but your main focus should be
on fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. By emphasizing complex
carbohydrates, you will get the energy you need, as well as a number of
important vitamins and minerals.
Carbohydrates are a necessary part of an endurance athlete’s diet for a
number of reasons. From the perspective of performance, carbohydrates are
utilized much faster than fat and protein. That is why at increased exercise
intensities, carbohydrates become the sole fuel source by allowing the body
--- PAGE 194 ---
to continue producing energy through anaerobic means once we have
reached our VO2max. Meanwhile, fat is used only at lower intensities
because it can’t keep up with high-energy demands, and protein is relied
upon when carbohydrate stores are exhausted. Carbohydrates also aid in
water absorption, so when you’re taking in fluids during a long run, the
carbohydrates will actually help the stomach empty faster, allowing the
body to more efficiently utilize water. This means that fluids and
carbohydrates reach their final destinations more quickly, and the faster
they get there, the less likely you are to run out of energy and hit the wall.
Carbohydrates are also the primary fuel source for your brain and
central nervous system. That foggy feeling or inability to focus late in a
race generally stems from rapidly depleting glycogen (carbohydrate) stores.
What’s more, carbohydrates play a role in metabolism. Maybe you’ve heard
the saying “Fat burns in the flame of carbohydrates.” Basically, by limiting
your intake of carbohydrates, you may also limit your ability to burn fat.
While not proven, the theory holds that the processes, or pathways, that
carbohydrates and fats go through to provide energy result in certain by-
products that are necessary for fat to be metabolized. From what I have
seen, the major processes will still occur, but about 20 percent of the
process ends up unaccounted for. Or, we can state that energy metabolism
of fat relies on carbohydrates to be present in order to work at a high rate of
efficiency. The point to take away here is that one thing can’t replace
another, and because carbohydrates are the limited source, they become the
most likely to break down the cycle. Finally, the storage of carbohydrates is
very limited, making them especially important to replenish on a daily
basis. They account for a large portion of your recommended dietary intake
because, without carbohydrates, you wouldn’t be able to train consistently,
much less run a good race.
Importance of carbohydrates for exercise:
// provide energy, especially at higher intensities
// aid in water absorption
--- PAGE 195 ---
// serve as primary fuel source for your brain and nervous
system
Besides all these important functions, carbohydrate stores play a
tangible role in your running performance. Consider the fact that between
the liver, muscles, and bloodstream, your body can store only around 2,000
calories’ worth of carbohydrates. Your body utilizes those carbohydrate
stores when exercising at even moderate intensities, but it begins to burn
through them more rapidly as intensity increases. Refer back to Figure 2.2,
and you’ll see that at 60 percent intensity, the average person is burning
about 50/50 between fat and carbohydrates. Because we have extremely
limited carbohydrate stores, and half-marathon pace is somewhere between
60 and 85 percent of maximal capabilities, you can see that if we are
burning 100 calories per mile, then at least 50 calories per mile are coming
from carbohydrates. With faster runners (with finishing times of 90 minutes
or faster), glycogen depletion is less of a worry, but they still burn it quickly
because of their high intensity level. For 2- to 3-hour half-marathoners,
glycogen depletion can be a risk because they are running a long way and at
a pretty high intensity. To make matters more complicated, the body first
burns through the carbohydrate (glycogen) stores in the muscles.
Altogether, the muscles store about 1,500 calories, but only the muscles that
are being used will actually burn that glycogen; unfortunately, our body
doesn’t allow one muscle to borrow glycogen from another muscle. For
instance, the quadriceps won’t be able to access glycogen from the trapezius
muscles. So, even though running requires the quads to work harder, thus
depleting the associated glycogen stores, they can’t simply borrow unused
glycogen from the less hardworking traps. You may have 1,500 calories’
worth of glycogen stored in your muscles, but you won’t be able to access
all of it, decreasing the amount of usable glycogen even further.
On top of all of this, the glycogen stored in the liver is reserved for your
brain and central nervous system. The amount in the blood is even lower
than what the liver has to offer, so don’t count on that source taking you
very far. The phrase “hitting the wall” refers to the point where you’ve
become reliant on your blood sugar to assist the running muscles, meaning
--- PAGE 196 ---
you’re running on an empty tank. Plainly put, proper carbohydrate
consumption provides the foundation of your nutritional training plan.
Many half-marathon runners won’t be in serious jeopardy of completely
running out of carbohydrate stores during their race; hitting the wall, or
bonking, occurs much more commonly in the marathon distance. However,
those runners who are covering the 13.1 miles in 2, 3, or more hours may
face running out of fuel at some point. Regardless of training level, without
those building blocks, your body will not tolerate any significant volume of
mileage or level of intensity.
Fats
Fats are a necessary part of a balanced diet, especially when you consider
the large quantity of fat that our body stores. If you strictly limit your fat
intake, either you’re not eating enough in general or you’re forced to eat
other nutrients all day long in order to feel satiated. Because fat has about
twice as many calories per gram as carbohydrates, a little bit of fat will go a
long way toward keeping you feeling full. Fat is also involved with the
structure of cell membranes and spinal cord tissue, which can have a direct
effect on physical performance. Finally, fat is essential because it helps the
body absorb vitamins A, D, E, and K, all of which are necessary for optimal
health.
In addition to contributing to overall wellness, fats lend a hand in
supporting your endurance training and running performance. As your
--- PAGE 197 ---
endurance increases, the mitochondria within the muscles grow and become
denser, which consequently gives you the opportunity to produce a greater
amount of aerobic energy. This is the point at which both fats and
carbohydrates can be utilized. Once the exercise intensity reaches 85
percent or higher, however, there isn’t enough oxygen available to allow fat
to be burned, so carbohydrates become the primary source. The good news
is that, while the average person switches to burning carbohydrates at
around 60 percent of maximal intensity, endurance training can bring that
percentage up a few extra points.
This means that your body will be able to burn fat at a higher intensity
before carbohydrates take over. In practical terms, you’ll be capable of
running a little bit faster for a little bit longer. Despite this, we still don’t
need to eat large amounts of fat. For the best results, your diet should
include about 20 percent fats, coming from sources such as nuts, fish, seeds,
and avocados and limiting fatty meats and other sources of saturated fat.
Importance of fats for exercise:
// abundant source of energy that spares carbs
// an increasingly better fuel source as your fitness improves
// location of crucial vitamin absorption
// involved in cell structure
Protein
Protein should make up the smallest amount of your diet, about 10–15
percent. It plays a major role in repairing damaged muscles after running
and also serves as an energy source. When you get to the point of drawing
from those protein stores, however, it’s a last-ditch effort to stay up and
running. Additionally, protein assists in the manufacture of enzymes,
antibodies, and hormones within the body, as well as serving as a
transporter for vitamins, minerals, and fat in the blood. Last but not least,
protein helps to maintain fluid balance both inside and outside the cells.
--- PAGE 198 ---
This is important because certain proteins in the blood regulate the balance
of water in our tissues as we sweat. Without that mechanism, a person could
run into serious issues with fluid loss, as well as electrolyte imbalances as a
result of excessive sweat loss. That could then lead to muscle cramping,
loss of coordination, or other serious medical issues.
Protein is relied upon to a small extent during exercise, but its reparative
abilities are the most important to you as a distance runner. And timing is
everything. By consuming protein at the same time as carbohydrates
following exercise, you minimize the damage done to the muscles and
speed recovery. Most important, protein helps you as an athlete preserve
lean muscle mass, which translates into better recovery and, therefore,
higher-quality training. When lean muscle mass is protected and
maintained, there is a greater opportunity for carbohydrates to be stored,
further preserving lean muscle mass and leading to better fuel utilization
during prolonged exercise. In extreme situations, that protein can be drawn
upon as an energy source; however, it will come from the running muscles,
signaling your body’s slow breakdown. If you fuel the right way, fats and
carbohydrates will provide the energy you need to successfully finish the
half-marathon, and protein will be left to assist in post-run repair.
--- PAGE 199 ---
Importance of protein for exercise:
// generates and repairs muscle tissue
// regulates water balance
// transports hormones, vitamins, minerals, and fat in blood
// manufactures enzymes
NUTRITION TAKEAWAYS
// There is no reason to shy away from carbohydrates, as long as
the majority are complex.
// Fat is okay in moderation, especially the fats that come from
seeds, nuts, and fish.
// Lean protein helps create and preserve muscle tissue and, if
necessary, provides energy.
// Basically, eat a balanced diet, and you’ll be well on your way to
supporting optimal running performance.
Hydration: Staying ahead of the game
The human body is composed of two-thirds water, making hydration just as
critical to a runner’s performance as nutrition. The impact of even slight
sweat loss on endurance performance may surprise you. Research has
shown that even a 2 percent decrease in hydration stores, or a mere 3
pounds of sweat for a 150-pound runner, can negatively affect physical
performance. Because sweat rates can reach up to 1–2 pounds per hour on a
cool, dry day, imagine the loss in hot and humid conditions. The resulting
physical response to dehydration is multifaceted. Many of the effects stem
from impaired cardiovascular functions via increased heart rate, decreased
stroke volume, and decreased cardiac output. As discussed when we took a
close look at physiology in Chapter 2, all these affect a runner’s VO2max
--- PAGE 200 ---
and, therefore, pace. Indeed, a 3 percent loss of sweat for that same 150-
pound runner means a 4–8 percent decrease in aerobic capacity.
Besides the cardiac implications, dehydration leads to a number of other
problems. First, it impairs your body’s ability to dissipate heat, allowing
your body temperature to rise. This not only will throw cold water on your
performance but also will increase your risk of serious heat-related illnesses
such as heat exhaustion and heatstroke. Gastrointestinal distress is another
symptom, which may lead you to avoid drinking more fluids, making the
problem even worse. Adding insult to injury, it can also cause an imbalance
in electrolytes, which are critical for muscle contractions, leading to
cramps, weakness, and incomplete conduction between nerves and muscles.
Further, the decreased VO2max will cause you to burn through your
glycogen stores at a much higher rate. If this wasn’t bad enough,
dehydration can even result in cognitive impairment, meaning you may not
even have the wits to pull over and stop running.
We aren’t looking to scare you, but we do want to emphasize the
importance of hydration. When determining the appropriate fluid intake,
take into account the following factors that affect fluid loss:
HIGHER AMBIENT TEMPERATURES // Unsurprisingly, the
hotter it is, the more you’ll sweat.
HIGHER HUMIDITY // In certain cases, this can have a larger
impact than actual air temperature. If it is warm or even hot, but not
humid, your body can still cool itself. However, when it is humid,
the mechanism that cools the body, sweating, doesn’t work because
the amount of moisture in the air is too high. Your sweat doesn’t
evaporate and create that cooling effect. Also, remember, the level
of humidity close to your body can increase if you’re wearing
nonwicking materials next to the skin.
BODY SURFACE AREA // Bigger runners have a higher capacity
to dissipate heat, but they also have increased surface area to gain
heat, especially in hot weather. In essence, the bigger you are, the
more likely you are to be hotter and sweat more.
--- PAGE 201 ---
CONDITION OF THE ATHLETE // A highly trained athlete has
a much better cooling potential than a nonconditioned athlete.
Although it may seem counterintuitive, a trained, heat-adapted
runner will actually sweat more than a poorly conditioned runner.
However, that conditioned athlete is better equipped to use this extra
sweating to cool off more efficiently.
ORIGINAL STATE OF HYDRATION // If a runner is already
slightly dehydrated going into an event, he or she will reach critical
points of dehydration much sooner than an athlete who is well
hydrated.
While it is important to understand how fluid is lost, you’ll also want to
know what factors impact fluid absorption. That is, after we ingest the fluid,
how does it get from the stomach to the bloodstream, where we can actually
use it? Let’s start with carbohydrates. We already mentioned that they aid in
the absorption of water; however, different types of carbs are absorbed at
varying rates. Because carbohydrates are basically chains of molecules, the
longer the chain, the more time it will take to exit the stomach. As scientists
have begun to grasp the inner workings of this process, sports drink
companies have started including two different lengths of chained
carbohydrates in their beverages (usually dextrose and maltodextrin). With
these drinks, you get the short chains that are quickly absorbed for
immediate usage and the longer chains that assist in sustained absorption
over time.
The amount of fluid you consume at any given time can also influence
the rate of absorption. Although larger amounts of fluids ingested at one
time are absorbed more quickly, for obvious reasons you aren’t going to
want to gulp down multiple cups of water at a single water stop during the
race. Instead, start by consuming large amounts of fluids during the days
leading up to the event and smaller quantities the day before and the
morning of the race. Keep in mind that the temperature of the fluid can also
increase or decrease absorption. At rest there appears to be no difference;
during exercise, however, cooler fluids seem to leave the stomach much
faster, while room-temperature drinks are more effectively utilized.
--- PAGE 202 ---
Remember, the stomach is where food is primarily broken down, with
actual absorption occurring in the small intestine.
Although you will have little control over the temperature of your
drinks along the race course, you can influence other absorption-related
factors, such as your relative state of hydration at the start line. Once you
begin running, there is no turning back to correct your hydration status. If
you’re dehydrated at mile 1, you will continue to be dehydrated for the
entire race. The progressive nature of dehydration makes it increasingly
difficult to “catch up” once you’re already at a deficit. Similarly, the faster
you run, the harder it becomes for your body to absorb fluids into the
bloodstream because the blood is pulled away from nonvital functions and
directed toward the exercising muscles. Instead of circulating blood through
the intestines and stomach, your system is working to pump blood to your
legs to provide oxygen. Besides the physiological difficulties associated
with absorbing fluids during fast running, there are also logistical
challenges. Anyone who has ever tried to take a drink while running at 10K
pace has probably experienced spilling more of the water than actually
consuming it.
It is clear that monitoring your hydration status is as important to your
half-marathon performance as any other aspect of training. Your hydration
status will support you during easy runs, on SOS days, and in the race itself
by keeping you healthy and allowing for consistent training. For the same
reasons regular training is important, when it comes to mastering proper
nutrition and hydration, practice makes perfect. It may take greater focus
and attention in the beginning, but over time your judgment will improve
and your base of fuel-related knowledge will expand.
While we spend a lot of time discussing fueling and hydration in
relation to race day, these factors are equally important during training.
Proper hydration takes a conscious effort every day; it is not achieved in a
couple of hours before a workout but over a longer time. In the same way,
carbohydrates need to be consumed and stored over the course of training to
keep you running strong. Just like chronic carbohydrate depletion, chronic
dehydration hinders performance. Similarly, protein will help with tissue
repair between workouts, making each workout as productive as possible.
So, even on the easy days, make a conscious effort to take in the proper
--- PAGE 203 ---
fluids and fuel to replace what you have already utilized and prepare you
for your next run.
HYPONATREMIA
Although a lot of media attention has focused on the relationship between
long-distance running and hyponatremia in recent years, the topic remains
murky. This condition occurs when there is an imbalance between the
sodium and water contents in the blood. It tends to surface when a runner is
losing a significant amount of sweat and simultaneously consuming large
amounts of water. Because sodium is involved in nerve impulses and proper
muscle function, this condition represents the disruption of an important
balance within the body. There are three types of hyponatremia: euvolemic,
when the water content increases and the sodium content stays the same;
hypervolemic, when both the sodium and water contents increase, but the
increase in water is far greater; and hypovolemic, when both sodium and
water decrease, but sodium decreases faster. In all three instances, the
concentration of sodium in the blood is diluted. It’s like mixing a bottle of
Gatorade, drinking half, and then refilling it with plain water, weakening
the original mixture.
The effects of hyponatremia are very serious, as it can affect brain and
muscle function to the point of coma and death. Despite these dangers,
however, clear-cut guidelines for avoiding it are not readily available. In the
end, remember that moderation in your hydration plan is important. Stick to
the following guidelines:
// If your exercise session is more than an hour long, use a sports
drink.
// Know your exercise sweat rate and consume liquids to that point.
Although most people replace about 65–80 percent of their fluid
losses, some people do drink beyond that point. (You can figure
your sweat rate using the worksheet in Appendix B.)
// In recovery, focus on electrolyte-containing fluids. There are
plenty of varieties that offer low-carbohydrate options for daily
replacement.
--- PAGE 204 ---
What and when to eat and drink
PREWORKOUT
The hours before your workout can be the toughest time to dial in nutrition
and hydration, especially for those trying to fit in early morning runs. While
it would be ideal for you to get up an hour before your run to take in a bit of
fuel, we understand that busy runners hold sleep in high regard. Every
minute counts, for both running and sleeping. When considering your
preworkout or pre-race routine, you have to weigh the pros and cons of
time-related factors. If you have to cut your slumber to 5–6 hours just to get
up and fuel an hour before your run, I say don’t worry about it. You’re
better off grabbing a healthy snack before bed and getting more sleep. I
always tell runners to address preworkout fueling on SOS days with
particular focus because fuel depletion can compromise pace and
performance. Easy days are less of a concern, since you won’t need as
much fuel to execute the workout. If you’re running later in the day,
however, you have a greater number of fueling options from which to
choose. Typically, the more time you have, the more you should eat. As
your workout approaches, the goal is to get in what you need the most of,
namely, carbohydrates and fluids, without filling up too much. Table 8.2
outlines the basic guidelines for eating before workouts.
--- PAGE 205 ---
DURING WORKOUTS
A certain amount of trial and error is necessary as you fine-tune your
overall fueling plan, but it is especially vital to test midrun nutrition during
training. By getting this right, you’ll avoid both dehydration and exhaustion
of those precious carbohydrate stores. Because you’ll be fueling throughout
your half-marathon, practice drinking and refueling during workouts that
exceed 1 hour. At times you may have to force yourself to eat and drink
during a hard effort, but your body will thank you on race day. There is
perhaps no greater performance booster than simple calories and hydration.
Hydration will undoubtedly give you the most bang for your buck in
both training and racing. Not only will fluids help maintain blood volume
levels, but sports drinks can provide crucial calories without your having to
add another component to your plan. Your own sweat loss rate may vary,
but on average, we lose between 2 and 4 pounds of sweat per hour during
exercise. If that’s not replaced, muscles receive less oxygen, less heat is
evaporated, and by-products (lactic acid) accumulate in greater amounts.
Among other outcomes, the body tries to compensate by making the heart
beat faster. Indeed, for every 1 percent of body weight lost as a result of
sweating, your heart rate will increase by up to 7 beats per minute.
Furthermore, for every 1 percent of body weight lost through dehydration,
you will slow down by about 2 percent. The race is already hard enough;
--- PAGE 206 ---
the last thing you need is your heart thumping faster and your legs moving
slower. At an 8:00-minute pace, a 2 percent loss in pace resulting from a 1
percent loss in body weight (as little as 1–2 pounds) translates into 5 lost
seconds per mile. If you slow down by 2–4 percent, which is quite
common, that 8:00-minute pace gets closer to an 8:20 pace. That is the
difference between a 1:44 and a 1:49 half-marathon finish.
The most recent research (Butler et al., Clin. J. Sports Med., 2006) says
that when we drink based solely on thirst, somewhere between 68 and 82
percent of the lost fluid is recovered. These academicians suggest that the
body compensates by basically pulling water from inside the cells to make
up the difference, in addition to the natural formation of water through the
combustion of fats and carbohydrates. While this undoubtedly occurs, they
also discuss a major flaw in this line of thought. Their study indicated that
all the aforementioned stipulations are true up to a 3 percent reduction in
body weight caused by sweat loss. The problem is that if we do not drink
until we are thirsty, we are already at about 2.3 percent (their calculation).
Their subjects had unlimited access to fluid, but in reality you won’t have
the luxury of consuming 6–8 ounces whenever you feel like it. When I first
read this study, I thought that perhaps everything we had been telling people
was wrong. On further examination, however, I realized that our hydration
strategies remain appropriate and pertinent in terms of real-world,
endurance performance conditions. The following are the general hydration
rules of thumb we recommend to runners. Those running less than 90
minutes may have less need for these guidelines, but those running 2 hours
or more should certainly consider incorporating these guidelines into their
training and racing.
START EARLY // Drink within the first 10–20 minutes of running
or at the first water stop. As mentioned, thirst is a good indicator,
but in the half-marathon scenario, you may not be able to physically
get in very much fluid. It’s hard to drink when you are flying!
DRINK 2–8 OUNCES OF FLUID EVERY 15–20 MINUTES //
For training workouts, this means carrying sufficient water with you
or placing it strategically beforehand. For races, this should work
--- PAGE 207 ---
well with the water and sports drink stations. Most races provide
these stations approximately every 2 miles.
// Keep in mind that it’s easier to drink more during the early
stages of a run or race. If you drink more early on and
continue to replace fluids regularly, you will keep the stores
topped off. This creates the fastest gastric emptying, which
means more rapid absorption of water, electrolytes, and
carbohydrates.
// Count the gulps. One gulp is roughly equal to 1 ounce of
fluid. So, try for 4–6 gulps.
// Don’t overdo it. Downing multiple cups of water will only
make you sick.
PLAN AHEAD // If you are planning on using sports drinks (or
gels) provided at the race, find out ahead of time what products will
be offered and practice using the same ones in workouts. This will
help you avoid unpleasant tummy troubles that can crop up when
your system doesn’t agree with a particular brand or type of product.
The guidelines for midrun nutrition are similar to those for hydration.
Gels are probably the most popular refueling product, but other options,
such as chews, are quickly gaining a following. Glucose tablets, which
diabetics use to raise their blood sugar levels, are another alternative; they
dissolve in your mouth and are a quick source of carbohydrates. Sports
drinks will add precious calories to your overall intake, alleviating the need
to consume as many calories from solid foods. Here’s what we suggest:
CONSUME 30–60 GRAMS OF CARBOHYDRATE PER HOUR
OF EXERCISE
// The longer you are out there, the more you should consume. For
anything longer than 4 hours, take in 60 grams per hour.
// An 8-ounce sports drink supplies 50–80 calories.
// Gels provide 25 grams of carbohydrate.
--- PAGE 208 ---
TAKE IN 200–300 TOTAL CALORIES PER HOUR
// If you were to drink 8 ounces of sports beverage every 20
minutes, you would get roughly 195 calories per hour. This will
be enough for most runners who are running less than 2 hours.
// In addition to fluids and gels, some runners choose to find
calories elsewhere in other types of food. This all depends on
what you prefer.
// If you use gels or something similar, chase with water, not a
sports drink.
// One gel every 30–45 minutes should provide enough calories.
Beyond the clear physical support, a calculated fueling regimen can also
play an important role in your mental game. My wife is a good example.
She was running her first half-marathon since the birth of our daughter and
wasn’t feeling confident, as her training had been haphazard at best as we
both adjusted to our new bundle of joy. Her plan was to carry a small
handheld bottle with a gel in the pocket. I didn’t think she needed any of it,
but I didn’t comment. At about 8 miles, she was looking spent, and I
wondered how the rest of the race would play out. When I saw her at 10
miles, however, she looked revived and strong. She finished well and ran
very even splits. The game changer for her? The gel. She said it woke her
up and cleared the fog. The takeaway point is this: She knew what she
needed and had a plan. She took confidence in following that plan and
saved herself from a potentially disheartening finish.
POSTWORKOUT
Refueling after a workout is just as important to the quality of your next
workout as your preworkout nutrition was to the effort you just completed.
This part of your nutrition plan is the easiest to carry out, so be sure not to
overlook its significance. When all is said and done, proper postworkout
fueling will help you recover from the run, maintain high levels of training,
and ultimately become a better runner. We recommend the following plan
for filling up after winding down:
--- PAGE 209 ---
THE INITIAL 15–30 MINUTES FOLLOWING EXERCISE ARE
THE MOST IMPORTANT
// For every pound of body weight lost, replenish with 2.5 cups of
water. To get an idea of how much water weight you tend to lose
on a run, weigh yourself periodically throughout the first weeks
of training, both before and after runs. With time you’ll be able
to make an educated guess about how much you should drink
following a run. Check out the sweat loss calculator to learn your
specific needs (see Appendix B).
// Immediately after your workout, take in 50–100 grams of
carbohydrate. In particular, we recommend foods with a higher
glycemic index because they will get into the bloodstream and
be delivered to the muscles quickly. The glycemic index
basically ranks foods on their rate of digestion. The quicker a
food is digested, the higher the number. Try any of the
following:
// bananas
// sports drinks
// oatmeal
// cooked carrots
// beans
// orange juice
// corn flakes
// baked potato
// bread
// ice cream
BEYOND THOSE FIRST 30 MINUTES AFTER EXERCISE,
TRY TO EAT A MEAL WITHIN THE NEXT 2 HOURS //
Oatmeal, peanut butter and a bagel, and cereal are great options, as
is anything else that contains a large amount of healthy
carbohydrates and some protein to promote muscle repair. A
protein-rich drink, like chocolate milk, is a great option.
--- PAGE 210 ---
PLAN AHEAD // If you are driving to a group workout or to a
park, pack something to consume when you are finished. Don’t wait
until you return home. Start the refueling process as soon as
possible.
Fueling plan leading up to race day
Once all the hard work is done and you have cut back on both the volume
and the intensity of your training, spend a little time fine-tuning your
nutritional game plan. The following is a guide with tips for the final days
leading up to the big race.
FINAL WEEK
// Although you have reduced your training volume, be sure to
maintain a normal diet and avoid making any big changes.
// Seventy percent of your diet needs to be carbohydrates, primarily
complex carbohydrates and starches. The increased capacity for
storage in your muscles will allow for the replenishment of all
deficits. Research has shown that endurance can increase by as
much as 20 percent through the complete restoration of glycogen
stores.
// Gaining weight is a sign that you are doing things right, so don’t
worry if you tip the scales at an additional pound or so. Even
gains of up to 5 pounds are common. While you may feel a bit
sluggish, this is normal during the tapering period. Now is not
the time to cut calories. Remember that every gram of stored
carbohydrate is stored with 3 grams of water, and you’ll need
every bit of that on race day. That said, don’t use this as an
excuse to eat more. Rather, adjust your diet to your caloric
needs.
// Hydrate throughout the week. Don’t wait until the day prior to
the race to play catch-up.
--- PAGE 211 ---
THE DAY BEFORE
// Drink a healthy beverage with every snack and meal. Rather than
sticking with water, mix it up with sports drinks.
// Avoid foods that cause gas or gastrointestinal disruption.
// Avoid high-fiber foods.
// Avoid sugar substitutes.
// Limit alcohol.
// Eat or drink a healthy bedtime snack, such as unbuttered
popcorn, a bagel and peanut butter, or a sports bar.
RACE MORNING
// The primary goal the few hours before the start of the race is to
top off fuel stores and stay hydrated. For me that usually means a
bagel and peanut butter, a banana, coffee, and maybe an orange
juice about 3 hours before the race.
// Consume carbohydrates via these guidelines:
1 hour prior: 50 grams total
2 hours prior: 100 grams total
3 hours prior: 150 grams total
4 hours prior: 200 grams total
So, if you eat 4 hours out from the start of the race, your goal
should be 200 grams of carbohydrates. If you eat 3 hours before
the race, aim for 150 grams, and so on. Because most races begin
fairly early in the morning, the majority of runners will be in the
2- to 3-hour window.
// The optimal amount of time to allow between eating and the start
of the race varies based on the individual. Remember, if you eat
early, you can always go back to bed. If you have a sensitive
stomach, a substantial bedtime snack may be preferable.
// Balance topping off reserves with having to stand in long lines
for the bathroom. If you come into race day well fueled, you
won’t have to worry about any last-minute fueling measures.
--- PAGE 212 ---
Race fueling strategy
When it comes to the full marathon distance, I can’t stress enough the
importance of nutrition during the race. However, for the half-marathon,
much depends on an individual runner’s finish time. For runners who will
finish in under 90 minutes, being well fueled and hydrated leading up to the
race is probably all they need to worry about. For runners who will finish in
2 or more hours, having an appropriate fueling strategy to execute during
the race could mean the difference between an impressive personal best and
not even being able to reach the finish line. With race nutrition and
hydration, for any runner regardless of finishing time, your two main goals
should be to minimize extreme fluid loss and maintain glycogen levels (as
mentioned, faster runners who start with a full tank may be fine without
fueling during the race).
In figuring out how and what you should consume, several factors
should be considered. First, caloric expenditure is more closely aligned with
the distance traveled rather than with the pace. Although a faster runner is
exercising at a higher intensity, he or she will burn about the same number
of calories as a slower runner of the same weight. However, while pace
might not matter, weight does. Put simply, for every kilogram of body
weight, we burn 1 calorie for every kilometer we run (1 cal/kg/km).
Because it’s easy to check how much you weigh (to convert to kilograms,
divide your weight in pounds by 2.2), and we know the distance of a half-
marathon (21.0975 km), we can easily calculate how many calories you will
burn during the race.
  Example: 150-lb. runner
150 lb. ÷ 2.2 kg/lb. = 68.18 kg
cal. burned = 21.0975 × 68.18 = 1,438 cal.
Those 1,438 calories will be a mixture of fat and carbohydrate calories.
To figure out the ratio, you must consider how fast you will be traveling,
--- PAGE 213 ---
because the faster you run, the more carbohydrates you use. Typical half-
marathon pace is usually around 60 percent of VO2max for beginners, 75
percent for advanced runners, and 85 percent for elite runners. This
information is enough to give us a general idea of what ratio of
carbohydrate to fat will result. See Table 8.3 for the appropriate mix of
carbohydrate and fat calories at various running intensities.
The next step involves figuring out how many calories per mile (or
kilometer) are being used. Consider the previous example of the runner who
will expend 1,438 calories during the race. To figure out expenditure per
mile, simply divide 1,438 by 13.1. The result is roughly 110 calories per
mile. From here we can calculate the range of carbohydrate expenditure per
mile. At 60 percent, the ratio would be 110 × 0.60, or 66 calories of
carbohydrate per mile. At 75 percent, the ratio would be 110 × 0.7, or 77
calories per mile. Finally, at 85 percent, the carbohydrate expenditure would
be 93.5 calories per mile. Given these values and depending on the pace the
runner is attempting, the total caloric expenditure from carbohydrate would
look like this:
cal./mile (66, 77, and 93.5) × 13.1 miles or
a range of 864.6–1,224.85 cal.
--- PAGE 214 ---
This difference amounts to about 350 calories, which may not seem like
much, but it actually equals about three extra energy gels (100 calories
each). This also shows how imperative it is to run at an appropriate
intensity during the race. Even a few seconds faster per mile for a
significant amount of time could put you at a carbohydrate deficit from
which you might not be able to recover. While we want you to set your
sights high and race to the best of your abilities, some risks aren’t worth
taking.
Although we have calculated a range of necessary carbohydrates, we
still haven’t discussed how many you should actually replace, which largely
depends on the amount that is stored in your exercising muscles. Although
the liver also stores glycogen, it would prefer to reserve it for the brain and
central nervous system, so it’s best if you can leave those stores alone.
While trained athletes store about 80 calories per gram in their muscles, that
glycogen is available only for local use. In other words, glycogen in your
arms won’t be available for use in your legs. On average, leg mass
constitutes approximately 21 percent of total mass in males and 20 percent
in females. With this information, we can figure out our potential
carbohydrate storage. To calculate your needs, take your weight in
kilograms and multiply it by 20 or 21 percent to calculate leg mass. From
there, multiply by 80 cal./kg to determine your average glycogen storage.
Tables 8.4 and 8.5 show the potential carbohydrate storage for males and
females at various weights.
68.18 kg × 0.21 = 14.32 kg
14.32 kg × (80 cal./kg) = 1,146 cal. of potential
carbohydrate storage (for running use)
--- PAGE 216 ---
Given our 68.18-kg example, we found that this runner can store 1,146
calories for use while running. We also know that this runner will expend
864–1,224 calories over the course of the entire race. If he’s running at 75–
85 percent VO2max, which wouldn’t be unusual, then he’s going to need a
little bit of help by way of extra calories during the race. Getting this right
is the trick with the half-marathon for many recreational runners. There is a
chance you can make it all the way—or that it could all come to a
screeching halt. Following the guidelines we have provided, this runner can
develop a comprehensive plan to optimize fuel storage potential and
maintain energy throughout the race. Remember that this replacement plan
will get you to the finish line, but there is no way to keep the tank
--- PAGE 217 ---
completely full. The nutrition aspect of half-marathon training and racing is
about optimizing those stores by teaching your body to burn fat more
efficiently.
As with most dietary guidelines and recommendations, these numbers
are based on averages. A runner who is extremely fit, lean, and muscular,
with a high proportion of slow-twitch muscle fibers, may have higher
storage capabilities. Regardless of these factors, all runners should err on
the side of caution. If your stomach can tolerate the calories, there is no
reason not to consume them. We can’t emphasize enough the importance of
nutritional dress rehearsals before race day. You should toe the line
knowing exactly when and what you’ll be eating and drinking the entire
13.1 miles.
--- PAGE 218 ---
9
Gearing up
MY COLLEGE TRACK COACH always used to say, “You can’t run fast
if you don’t look good!” While he may have simply been referring to our
shirts not being tucked in, it does beg the question of whether or not our
shoes and apparel really make a notable difference in our performance.
Certainly for the sake of comfort, certain running-specific items are now a
necessity, such as quality running shoes. As one with 75,000-plus miles on
my legs, I can make a compelling personal case for shoes keeping a career
going. However, there remains a lot of debate out there on the topic—and a
lot of choice. One thing is for sure: We’ve come a long way from Emil
Zatopek running repeats through the woods in his combat boots!
Shoes are an extension of your personal biomechanics. While there are
a lucky few who have textbook bones and musculature, chances are you
don’t. Most runners have at least a couple of minor imperfections that
predispose them to injury, like one leg that’s a little longer than the other, a
fallen arch, or a weak pelvis. This is where shoes come into play. Getting
fitted in the right pair of shoes is as important as training smart and eating
right. To help you with the shoe selection process, we will discuss stride
biomechanics, foot type, and the various components to look for in a shoe.
For the minimalists out there, I’ll dabble in that debate, as well. I’ll also
mention some principles for choosing among the colorful displays of
apparel that you will find. After reading this chapter, you should be ready to
go to your local running specialty store, confer with an expert, and choose
the best shoes and apparel for you.
Running stride biomechanics
--- PAGE 219 ---
When it comes to selecting the right shoe, several factors must be
considered. One is the point of impact between the foot and the ground,
referred to as the foot strike. A related consideration is how long your foot
stays on the ground during each step. With foot strike, the goal is to be brief
enough that braking forces (which slow you down and are jarring to your
body) are minimized, but not so brief that the maximal force used to move
the body forward is compromised. It may not seem like foot strike could
have a significant overall impact on performance, but in the long term, it
makes a big difference. Consider this: Over the course of 5 kilometers, a
runner finishing in 30 minutes will take a whopping 5,400 steps. By
decreasing foot strike time by just 1/100 of a second, he or she would run a
whole minute faster over 5 kilometers. Extrapolate that to the half-
marathon, and you’re talking about potentially shaving minutes off your
time, merely by striking more efficiently.
Though there are certain universal truths concerning foot strike
biomechanics, much debate over the ideal place to land still exists,
questioning whether the heel, midfoot, or forefoot is best. Studies
examining this aspect of running should be read with caution. For every
study that comes out saying one thing, another study draws a different
conclusion. This area of examination is clearly still open for debate.
However, the more information that comes out, the more it appears that foot
strike is highly individual to our own biomechanics. One of the more
reliable studies, published in the Journal of Strength and Conditioning
Research in 2007 (Hasegawa et al., “Footstrike Patters of Runners at the 15-
km Point During an Elite-Level Half Marathon,” 21[3]: 888–893), looked at
the foot strike patterns of elite runners during a half-marathon race. The
results showed that nearly 75 percent of them landed on their heels, while
24 percent landed midfoot, and just 1 percent were forefoot strikers. It
should also be noted that 60 percent of the first 50 finishers of the race were
midfoot strikers.
Because the research is somewhat unreliable in even categorizing the
various types of foot strike, it is more productive to look at the matter in a
different way. What I have noticed both anecdotally while working with
runners and by studying the emerging research is that where the foot lands,
relative to your body weight, is probably more important than what part of
the foot is landing. For instance, landing on the heel first isn’t necessarily
--- PAGE 220 ---
bad, provided the foot is landing close to a runner’s center of gravity (in
other words, underneath him). But if the same runner is landing heel first
and his foot is far out in front, then he is overstriding—an underlying cause
of many issues and injuries—and probably could benefit from a form fix or
a different shoe.
One reason runners overstride is in an attempt to cover more distance
with each stride. However, the action is counterproductive because it
creates a braking motion and forces your legs to absorb more shock. What
happens when people try to lengthen their stride is they just try to throw
their leg farther out in front of them. By doing that, they land with their foot
way too far in front of their body and land directly on their heel and with
their toes way up in the air. This increases the time they are in contact with
the ground, and as a consequence their pace also slows. If you focus on
landing beneath your center of gravity, you’ll avoid these issues.
While the verdict is still out in the academic world, we recommend
simply proceeding with training and not becoming too preoccupied with
altering your natural form. There are, however, a couple of practical tips
concerning foot strike that may help you run more efficiently. First, as we
just suggested, avoid overstriding. Instead of trying to develop monster
strides, think about lifting your legs with the quads and pulling the lower
leg underneath the quad upon each strike with the ground. This will cause
you to land under your center of gravity and on the middle of your foot. The
other variable that you can tinker with to develop a more efficient foot
strike is posture. When you hear a coach tell a runner to “run tall,” that
means keeping the shoulders pulled back, with a slight bend at the waist;
avoid slouching your shoulders, and view your entire torso up to your head
as a single lever. The slight forward lean will keep you from overdoing
posture and ending up looking like a drum major in a marching band.
Remember, your pelvis should be beneath your center of gravity, and your
feet striking under you, with neither out in front of your body.
Foot type
In addition to the way you strike the ground with each step, the actual shape
of your feet should play a role in your shoe selection process. Among the
--- PAGE 221 ---
many shapes and sizes of human beings, three major foot types come to the
forefront: those with flat arches, high arches, and medium arches. Through
coaching and working at the Hansons Running Shops, we have found that
the flat foot, although not the most common, is definitely the most
troublesome. In addition to having a flatter arch, flat feet are often
accompanied by ankles that lean inward toward one another. When running,
individuals with this foot type tend to land on the outsides of their feet, and
as they proceed through the foot strike, the foot and ankle roll inward, also
referred to as overpronation. Some amount of pronation is normal as the
foot naturally rolls inward, providing shock attenuation and giving the body
leverage to push off from the ground, but a flat-footed runner who
overpronates, or rolls inward too much, tends to experience an increase in
certain overuse injuries. The main problem is that this runner’s feet tend to
be too flexible, cushioning the blow of the foot slamming into the ground
but also providing little leverage to carry the body through the striking
motion to assist in pushing off from that step. This excessive motion leads
to a host of rotational forces applied to the foot, ankle, shin, and knee,
creating issues like tendinitis, plantar fasciitis, and Achilles tendinitis. As
you may have guessed, this foot type requires a very specific shoe to
alleviate these problems and allow for normal running.
The second type of foot is one that has a high arch, which is,
unsurprisingly, the exact opposite of the flat foot. A runner with this foot
type also lands on the outside of the foot but remains there all the way
through toe-off (the point at which the toes propel the runner forward as the
foot is pushed off from the ground). While the flat foot offers great natural
cushioning but is a poor lever for pushing off, the reverse is true for the
high-arched foot. Along with high arches comes inflexibility, so the feet are
unable to do a good job of absorbing the forces that running imposes on the
body. All the weight is put on the outside of the foot during ground contact;
as a result, even the toe-off is somewhat limited because it can’t take full
advantage of the big toe to push off. Ironically, this motion, called
underpronation or supination, can lead to some of the same injuries as
overpronation but for different reasons. While rotational forces tend to be
the cause of injuries in flat-footed runners, poor shock absorption is the
plight of supinators. In addition, this foot type may lead to a greater number
--- PAGE 222 ---
of issues with the iliotibial band, the long band of tissue that stretches from
the pelvis down to the knee joint.
The third foot type is somewhere in the middle, with a medium (neutral)
arch. Although it is often labeled as “normal,” that is not to say it is the
most common. In fact, it is the least common. The lucky runner with this
foot type will have a foot strike that likely begins at the middle to the
outside of the heel and then gently rolls to the middle of the foot, continuing
to use the leverage of the big toe, therefore maximizing toe-off. Although
the biomechanics may be better, a medium-arched runner still runs the risk
of injury by running in a shoe that is too supportive or not supportive
enough. As we have alluded, each biomechanical difference comes with its
own set of unique challenges, making it particularly important to choose a
shoe that is made for your arch type. For a completely accurate assessment
of your foot type and accompanying shoe category, seek out advice from a
professional at a running specialty store or from a gait analysis expert. You
can do tests at home to determine your foot type, such as a simple wet test,
but they don’t always guarantee a proper shoe prescription. The wet test is
simply stepping on a dry towel with your wet feet. The impression that your
foot leaves will give you an indiciation of your arch height or type. When
choosing a shoe, it is important not only to consider your foot type but also
to understand the motion of your feet when running, as well as other
biomechanical issues.
Remember that we all have physiological imperfections. Being
biomechanically, anatomically, and genetically blessed is a rarity, even at
the elite level. I recently saw a picture that featured several elite American
10K runners. It showed their 10K times and photos of their footstrikes. I
didn’t see one that would be considered biomechanically perfect. So the real
question is whether what you are currently doing is keeping you healthy
and running pain free. If not, you must decide whether or not you can
address the issue with an appropriate shoe.
Shoe construction
To understand what type of shoe may be best for your feet, you should be
familiar with the various components that make up running-specific
--- PAGE 223 ---
footwear. The main pieces are the outsole, midsole, last, heel counter, and
upper.
THE OUTSOLE
Let’s start at the bottom with the outsole of a shoe, also known as the tread.
Until recently, the outsole did little more than provide traction, with the
only variation existing in the type of rubber used. Now, however, there are a
growing number of technologies used for outsoles. Instead of one piece of
rubber, the outsoles are often broken into pods for the heel and forefoot,
which saves weight. Also, rather than rubber, today’s companies are relying
on new materials, like silica, which are said to provide better traction in wet
conditions, as well as being more environmentally friendly. Outsole
technology has also improved in terms of the general wear of the shoe,
meaning you can get more miles out of a pair of shoes. In fact, for most
runners, the midsole breaks down well before the outsole.
THE MIDSOLE
The midsole is where most of the action occurs from a biomechanical
standpoint. In recent years, once-popular midsole materials, like ethyl vinyl
acetate (EVA) and air pockets, have been replaced with new technologies
that are more resilient, lighter, and biodegradable. Cushioning technology
has also improved, allowing the shoes to absorb forces more readily and last
up to 15 percent longer.
While all midsoles contain cushioning, the amount of support varies.
Depending on how much stability a runner needs, some shoes contain a
denser midsole to provide more support, including dual-density and tri-
density materials. This type of midsole helps to keep an overpronating foot
in a more neutral position, but it also adds weight to the shoe. Different
shoe models contain varying amounts of these materials, leading to a wide
variety of stability and weight options. To spot a shoe that contains a denser
midsole, look for a gray area that constitutes part of the medial side (inside)
of the midsole. Other pieces are sometimes added for extra support, such as
roll bars, which make for an even stiffer shoe. The more a person pronates,
the more he or she will need these extra components.
--- PAGE 224 ---
When you buy a good pair of running shoes, the midsole is where your
money is going. Instead of looking at the tread to determine whether your
shoes need to be replaced, it is more important to consider the number of
miles you’ve run in the shoe and the wear and tear on the midsole (average
life expectancy is 300–500 miles). Despite all the technological advances,
shoes still break down, and as soon as the midsole is past its prime, you’re
at risk for injury.
THE LAST
The last is the actual shape of the shoe. There are three basic lasts: straight,
curved, and semicurved. Each of these varieties is correlated with a
different foot type to control motion optimally. For instance, a straight last
is the best foundation for an overpronating runner because it helps control
the excessive inward rolling that characterizes the motion of a flat-footed
runner, also providing for better toe-off. The curved last offers the opposite
of the straight last; instead of being symmetrical, it is markedly curved
along the medial side of the shoe where the arch sits. A curved last is built
for supinators to help deal with the poor natural cushioning by promoting a
slight inward roll. Finally, the semicurved last can be considered a hybrid
between the curved and straight varieties; it is tailored to runners with a
medium (neutral) arch, allowing for natural pronation.
THE HEEL COUNTER
You can’t see the heel counter, which is a unit that hugs the heel to
minimize motion in the ankle. Because some runners need this type of
control and others don’t, there are varying levels of heel counter stability,
with the most flexible shoes having no heel counter at all.
THE UPPER
The lightweight material that covers the top of the foot is known as the
upper. Usually made of a highly breathable nylon mesh, the upper permits
sweat and water to be wicked away from the feet, keeping them cool and
dry. If you live in a cold-weather state, there are uppers that provide more
weather-resistant capabilities to keep snow and slush out of the shoe. You’ll
--- PAGE 225 ---
also notice the various lacing patterns of different uppers; many of the
newest versions help to hug the arch and provide a bit of extra support.
Shoe type
Despite the seemingly endless array of options, running shoes fall into
specific categories. Just as there are three foot types, there are three main
classes of shoes. Even so, there are many shades of gray, recently making
way for a fourth, and perhaps a fifth, category. We will discuss the
following shoe types: motion control, neutral, stability, lightweight, and
minimalist.
MOTION CONTROL
This shoe is designed for the flattest of feet. A typical motion-control shoe
is built atop a straight last and has a dual-density midsole from the heel to
beyond the arch, a plastic roll bar in the heel and arch, and a stiff heel
counter. With all the extras, these shoes aren’t your lightest option, but they
are good at their main job, which is to prevent overpronation.
NEUTRAL
These shoes are best suited for a runner who has high arches. They are built
on a curved last with loads of cushioning, no dual-density midsole
materials, and a minimal heel counter. The goal of this type of footwear is
to provide cushioning and flexibility without tipping the scales.
STABILITY
The stability category is for neutral and mildly overpronating “normal”
runners. The last is typically semicurved, with some dual-density midsole
technology, a flexible forefoot, ample cushioning, and a mild heel counter.
This type of shoe provides a nice middle-of-the-road option for a runner
who needs a slight amount of support without sacrificing cushioning.
LIGHTWEIGHT
--- PAGE 226 ---
While lightweight shoes have been around for a long time, they are
becoming increasingly mainstream, falling somewhere between a regular
running shoe and a racing flat. They are akin to a lightweight version of a
neutral shoe, with certain exceptions that include supportive features. For
most runners, they shouldn’t be worn exclusively in training. From a
practical standpoint, they just won’t last very long. Lightweight means less
material, which translates into decreased durability, support, and
cushioning. For these reasons, the average runner will likely prefer a more
substantial shoe. Lightweight shoes are, however, a good option for certain
runners to wear for specific SOS workouts, especially speed and strength
work. Racing flats are a subcategory of lightweight shoes. For the same
reasons already stated, they should be used only in certain circumstances,
like racing! They tend to have even less material and have a life expectancy
of about 100–150 miles.
MINIMALIST
Because minimalist footwear has opened the floodgates to much
controversy, it is worth spending a little time explaining the debate so you
can decide if you want to try a shoe from this fast-growing category.
Minimalist footwear offers little if any cushioning or true protection for the
feet, allowing you to feel as if you’re running barefoot. While this type of
footwear has gained plenty of notoriety in recent years, the
recommendations on wearing minimalist shoes have aroused much
argument. From Olympic coaches to weekend warriors, it seems that
everyone has an opinion. Initially, the Hansons wouldn’t sell the trend-
driven minimalist models, not so much because they thought the shoes were
simply a fad but mainly because people just aren’t very good at following
directions. Consumers wanted these shoes because they were light,
fashionable, and the new cool thing. Although the box usually gives
specific instructions to begin using the shoes very gradually, people would
lace them up and head out for 5 miles right off the bat. After a week of
running in the minimalist shoes, they’d end up injured without
understanding why.
Today it is impossible to ignore the minimalist movement, and most
running specialty stores, including Hansons Running Shops, stock at least a
--- PAGE 227 ---
couple of models. To help you decide if such a shoe is right for you, let’s
take a serious look at the origins as well as the pros and cons of
minimalism. First, it is important to understand the premise of minimalism,
which includes two basic ideas: (1) You should wear the least amount of
shoe that you can tolerate without getting hurt, and (2) by wearing less
shoe, you strengthen the feet and improve your running stride. Minimalist
advocates often argue that our ancestors were made to run barefoot, so we
should get back to basics and do the same. The key word here is
“ancestors.” These folks didn’t wear shoes for 20 years and then decide to
go run barefoot for a 10-miler. Living in a world much different from that
of our Paleolithic forefathers and foremothers, we wear shoes from the time
we are very young, so a transition from wearing shoes to going barefoot is
necessary. Most proponents of minimalism suggest taking a gradual
approach to decreasing the amount of shoe over the course of several
months. If you are wearing a stability model, for instance, you should not
go directly to a minimalist shoe but perhaps transition with a lightweight
trainer before moving to the minimalist or “barefoot” footwear. This allows
the bones and soft tissues to gradually adjust to the minimalist footwear.
Even after you have fully transitioned, we don’t recommend wearing this
type of shoe every day for regular training; instead, think of it as a training
supplement to be worn periodically.
Another argument supplied by the minimalist movement states that
running in less of a shoe helps strengthen your feet. While not many will
argue against this notion, the idea should be approached with prudence. For
those of you who have run in racing flats or track spikes, or even done
speed work, think about how sore your calves are the following day.
Running in minimalist shoes elicits similar strain and resulting fatigue and
soreness. Now imagine that you place this same stress on the calves day
after day by continuing to wear this type of footwear. How long would you
guess it would take before injuries arise? The current research says about
two weeks (Lieberman et al., “Foot Strike Patterns and Collision Forces in
Habitually Barefoot Versus Shod Runners,” Nature 463 [January 28, 2010]:
531–535). The point is that most people don’t take the time to safely
transition from regular shoes to minimalist footwear, causing a seemingly
endless list of problems.
--- PAGE 228 ---
The final contention made by minimalist supporters is that wearing less
of a shoe will improve running form, the goal being to encourage forefoot
or midfoot striking over heel striking. The basic thought is that landing on
the midfoot reduces impact forces, diminishing not only the risk of injury
but also the need for shoe cushioning. Studies have shown that barefoot
runners who land on the forefoot display significantly lower impact forces
than runners who wear shoes and land on their heels. This information is
certainly interesting; nevertheless, the available research on the subject is
limited, making it important to dissect each new study. The primary
findings of current research are that runners who are accustomed to running
barefoot or in minimalist shoes usually land on the midfoot and forefoot.
They also tend to land with significantly lower impact force than a runner
wearing shoes. On the other hand, runners who aren’t adapted to running
barefoot or in minimalist footwear will most likely land on their heels when
they take off their shoes. The result of this is a landing force that is nearly
seven times greater than when landing on the heel while wearing shoes. For
many runners, it’s best to stick with their normal shoes (ibid.).
One of the main arguments against wearing shoes is that they don’t
reduce the risk of injury. It is true that the injury rate of runners has hovered
around 70 percent for the last four decades. However, the statistics
potentially offer alternate explanations that don’t involve the issue of
footwear. According to Running USA, the number of half-marathon
finishers went from 612,000 people in 2004 to more than 1.6 million in
2011! Along with that, given the general trends in obesity, one could
assume that the weight of the average endurance runner has also increased.
Simply put, a far wider range of the overall population spectrum is running
half-marathons than ever before, which means that more injuries are bound
to happen. It is safe to postulate that, perhaps, traditional running shoes and
the new technologies introduced over the years have actually helped keep
more runners healthy, rather than the opposite. There is simply no way of
knowing with certainty, but this is what many coaches believe.
In deciding what is best for you as a runner, consider the research along
with your own biomechanics and injury history. Minimalist running will
work for some, but not for others. If you want to try it, be patient and allow
yourself a considerable amount of time to make the transition, especially if
you are running high mileage. Using this footwear will require a significant
--- PAGE 229 ---
reduction in your training, so experimenting with it at the beginning of a
training cycle isn’t a good idea. Our suggestion is first to wear something
like a lightweight trainer for SOS workouts (other than long runs) and
regular trainers the other days to see how your body responds. As always,
pay attention to what your body is telling you, read the research for
yourself, and ignore ostentatious claims made by the media.
Footwear pricing
One of the most common questions runners ask about shoes relates to price.
Indeed, not all shoes are created equal. As in buying a car, the more features
you want or need, the more you’re going to pay. Remember, however, that
shoe type, not cost, should guide your decision; the most expensive shoe is
not necessarily the best one for you. When you head to the store, be sure to
consider your specific needs and make an informed decision. There are
three basic price points: entry-level, midgrade, and high-end.
ENTRY-LEVEL
Your cheapest option, these shoes offer the basics but not much else. They
are great for someone just getting into the sport, especially those who aren’t
even sure they’ll continue running. Most entry-level shoes are made with
cushioning in the heel but not in the forefoot. They are noticeably less
responsive and just don’t feel as comfortable as high-end models. Even so,
these shoes are reliable and well constructed, and they get the job done.
They will also be the cheapest way to get out of a running shop. While even
less expensive running shoes can be found at department stores, we never
recommend choosing anything below this category.
MIDGRADE
The most popular price point among running shoes, models that fall into
this category offer the basics, plus a few extras like full-length cushioning,
better midsole material, a more responsive feel, and an enhanced overall fit.
--- PAGE 230 ---
A blend of luxury and functionality, this category of shoe will be able to
withstand a few more miles than the entry-level shoes.
HIGH-END
Shoes in this category have all the bells and whistles in terms of the latest
technology, whether you need them or not, and are often a company’s
“premier” model. You may get a little more wear out of these shoes, but
runners need to weigh whether the higher price tag is worth it for their
individual needs.
How to choose a shoe
With a firm understanding of the various types of running shoes on the
market, you are now ready to move forward with selecting a pair that is
right for you. The most important step you can take is to go to a running
specialty store rather than making a purchase at an online superstore. While
some get lucky selecting shoes off the Internet, you are far more likely to
get the right fit if you have a knowledgeable employee assist you with the
fitting process. Selecting the right shoes is like putting together the pieces
of a puzzle; a well-trained employee will help you find the missing pieces
and make a good choice. When you go to the store, be sure to bring along
your old running shoes and come ready to answer questions about your
training and past running experience, such as:
// “Have you had any injuries?”
// “How did you last shoes treat you?”
// “Have you been fitted for running shoes before?”
Next, a running shop specialist is likely to examine the wear pattern on
the bottom of your old shoes to get a general idea of how you strike the
ground. For instance, if you tend to grind down the entire medial (inside)
side of the tread, you’re most likely overpronating and need more support
than that shoe offers. Conversely, if the outside edge is worn, you’re
--- PAGE 231 ---
probably supinating and need less support and more cushioning. If your
wear pattern is even, you’re likely already in the correct shoe category. It is
important to keep in mind that this isn’t an exact science. If you’ve gone
through 10 versions of the same model and haven’t had any issues with
injuries, stick with what you know works for you, regardless of wear
pattern.
In most running specialty shops, the employee will also ask to observe
your gait. Many running establishments have treadmills and cameras that
capture images of the motion of your feet during walking and running.
When the images are slowed down on the screen, you can see exactly how
you are striking. Even without such technology, an experienced employee
can watch you walk or run and get a good idea of what type of shoe you
should wear. If you’re looking to go a step beyond, you can visit a sports
performance lab and get a gait analysis with the use of special software for
a reasonable fee. Another new technology that is becoming more popular is
a basic force pad that the runner stands on without shoes. This force, or
pressure, pad shows the outline of the foot and gives a fairly accurate idea
of arch type. It also shows where you place the most pressure, which can
help determine where you might need more cushioning and whether you
need any stability in the shoes. You also usually receive a printout of your
foot scan, along with recommendations on shoe type.
Once you are presented with several options of shoes that are
appropriate for your feet, the responsibility is on you to decide which pair is
the most comfortable. Be sure to select the right size; just because your
dress shoes are a size 9, don’t assume your running shoes will be the same.
When you put the shoes on, consider these factors:
HEEL // The heel should provide a snug fit, preventing any
slippage.
TOE BOX // There should be a bit of room in the toe box in terms
of both length and width. Your toes should have room to splay out
and push off when you’re running, but you don’t want so much
room that your feet slide around.
--- PAGE 232 ---
TIMING // If you can arrange it, go to the store around the same
time of day you’d normally run, because your feet swell throughout
the day. What feels like the right size in the morning can be too tight
after a day spent on your feet.
The final decision usually comes down to how the shoe fits your feet.
When given three shoes from the same category and price range, it is likely
any of them will do the job. Choose the one that feels the best. Remember
to select your shoes based on function, not fashion. By understanding foot
types and shoe categories, and by working with a knowledgeable employee
at a running specialty store, you’ll end up with a pair of shoes that will
serve you well during your training.
When to replace shoes
We have found that most runners who are new to our training programs
assume they can purchase a new pair of shoes at the beginning of training
and wear them all the way through race day. The flaw in this reasoning is
made apparent when the runner realizes that a pair of shoes can carry a
person for only 300–500 miles, depending on the shoe, body type, and
running style. The Beginner Program has you running a total of about 640
miles over 18 weeks of training, putting anyone who uses that plan well
beyond the expiration date. In reality, you will need two pairs to get you
through training and the race itself. While a lucky few may be able to make
it through training without swapping out their shoes, the large majority of
runners will find new injuries pop up as their shoes age. It may be your
shins, your knees, or the bottoms of your feet because, when a shoe breaks
down, you lose the intended support and cushioning. Without those
features, you expose yourself to the common injuries that occur with your
particular foot type.
In most cases, we suggest getting fit for one pair, trying them out for a
few weeks, and then deciding whether to purchase an identical pair or a
different model. If you end up loving the first pair you bought, make sure
that the model hasn’t changed when you go to buy the next pair. Although
the name may be the same, models can differ from one season to the next,
--- PAGE 233 ---
bringing along significant issues with fit that may not jibe with your
preferences and overall comfort.
Race day kicks
Your first run in a new pair of shoes most certainly should not be on race
day, advice that is echoed in every running shop and by every coach across
the country. Most shoes are ready to be worn right out of the box, requiring
little to no break-in time, but it is important to make sure that the specific
pair of shoes you’ll be wearing for your 13.1-mile race will be comfortable.
While you could wear multiple pairs of the same model with no problems,
you still need to give your body time to adjust to the new shoe. If you think
about it, it makes perfect sense. As a shoe slowly breaks down, your foot
adjusts to its slightly changing makeup. However, when you lace up that
brand-new pair right off the store shelves, your feet have to make an
immediate adjustment to the more substantial thickness of the midsole and
the shape of the upper. This goes for runners who wear orthotics too. Just as
your feet need to adapt to the new shoe, so do your inserts. The shoes you
race in should have enough mileage to feel familiar, but not so many miles
that they are beginning to break down. For most runners, this falls between
50 and 100 miles, meaning two to three weeks before the race.
When selecting a race day shoe, most runners will choose a model in
which they can also log plenty of training miles, although some runners
look for a lighter shoe for race day. When deciding whether or not to lighten
up for the big day, consider that you’re going to be on your feet for a long
time, longer than for any of your training runs. That means your feet are
going to swell and may be in need of a slightly bulkier shoe that has
adequate cushioning to take the brunt of the force upon each foot strike.
Keep in mind that racing flats are lighter because they lack cushioning and
support. Because fatigue will have a detrimental effect on running
mechanics and running economy, you become more susceptible to injury as
you tire. We ask most runners considering flats, “Why sacrifice a couple of
ounces that may ultimately take a toll on your biomechanics?”
So when is a good time to wear flats? The more competitive you are, the
more you should consider wearing flats. If you already do your SOS days in
--- PAGE 234 ---
a lightweight trainer, minimalist shoe, or racing flat, then you could
certainly entertain the idea of wearing a flat on race day. When it comes to
making this decision, however, recognize that you will be trading the
comfort and security of cushioning and stability for a lighter weight. Some
runners really need that extra cushioning and support, especially during the
later stages of the race. If you are in this camp but are still interested in
going lighter, consider the lightweight trainer category. In recent years these
types of shoes have emerged as a great transitional option between a regular
training shoe and a racing flat. They aren’t as substantial as your everyday
training shoe, but they will offer enough support and cushioning for limited
use, like a half-marathon. This would allow you to save a couple of ounces
of shoe weight without running the risk of injury.
In my experience, I have found that running in regular training shoes
works for most of my daily runs. However, for the long runs when I’m
looking to pick up the pace, I often choose lighter-weight, more flexible
shoes that still support my low arches. It isn’t much, but that decreased
weight makes me feel faster, while the shoes still offer the protection I need
to keep me from getting injured, especially because I wear them only for
certain workouts. If you decide to purchase a second pair of lightweight
trainers, be sure to wear them for a few workouts before racing in them so
you will know whether they will work for the big day.
Apparel
While apparel and accessories are also important to half-marathon training,
this is simply too vast a category for the focus of this book. What you wear
on race day will depend on both weather and what you have worn in
training. For instance, a running cap may be a perfect accessory for a rainy,
cool race in March; in July, it may do nothing but trap heat. The following
are some basic guidelines to keep in mind when choosing your ensemble:
AVOID COTTON // Don’t wear any cotton socks, shorts, pants, or
shirts. Instead of helping to wick moisture and heat away from your
body, cotton traps heat and absorbs sweat, creating a humid
--- PAGE 235 ---
environment close to your skin. This can lead to both chafing and
blisters.
DRESS DOWN // Pretend it’s 20 degrees warmer than it actually is
when choosing your outfit. If it’s 40 degrees outside, dress like it is
60. You will be chilly the first mile, but once you start generating
heat, you will warm up quickly.
CONSIDER COST // Consider cost per wear when purchasing
running clothing. It’s not about the initial investment, but rather how
much wear you are going to get out of it. Good running apparel can
be pricey, but it is quite durable and should last several seasons.
TRY IT ON // Seams can rub, shorts can ride up, shirts can feel too
baggy or too tight. When you find what you want to wear on race
day, be sure to try it on and see how it fits and feels.
A recent trend in running apparel is compression-based socks and tights.
There are a couple of theories regarding this technology. First, some
contend that compression apparel can improve race day performance by
increasing venous return and thus by-product (lactate) clearance. In theory,
this would improve performance because you are able to run at a harder
pace while still ridding your body of the stuff that causes you to slow down.
Proponents of compression also point to its potential role in reducing
delayed onset muscle soreness (DOMS) and thereby decreasing recovery
time after hard training and racing. On the flip side, a recent article
concluded that compression feels good but doesn’t help the veins in the
lower leg do their job any better. In fact, it was argued that post-run
compression can lead to deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or a blood clot.
Because this type of apparel and the accompanying research are so new,
the jury is still out on its effectiveness. Whatever you choose to wear on
race day, make sure you have taken it for a few test runs first. Ideally, wear
the outfit on a longer run so you know that with time and increased sweat
output, the materials won’t cause you any problems. After all the hard
training you’ve put in, you really don’t want to have a wardrobe
malfunction on the big day.
--- PAGE 236 ---
10
Race tactics
THE LAST THING YOU want is for your race to be undermined before
you even get to the starting line. Race day nerves are common, but you
have worked too hard to be dismantled by poor planning. There is no
strategy on earth that can eliminate all the jitters and unknowns that might
crop up, but certain steps can put you ahead of those who are not prepared.
Focus on controlling the variables that you can and planning for the ones
you can’t. From your pre-race meal, to where you’ll meet your family at the
finish, to what shoes you’re going to wear, to checking the weather and
having the appropriate layers, planning ahead will go a long way toward
keeping you calm when it matters. Going into race weekend, Plan A, along
with Plan B and Plan C, should be well rehearsed and ready to be put into
motion. When you’re relaxed at the start line, you’re less likely to make
silly mistakes in the early stages of the race, keeping you focused and ready
to follow protocol. We often caution runners not to underestimate the
amount of planning a half-marathon requires. Consider the following
factors as you make arrangements prior to race morning, remembering that
your race will only be as good as your pre-race preparation, whether that is
the training itself or getting to the start line on time.
Pre-race preparation
TRAVEL
If you are headed to a destination race, you’ll probably have to arrange your
travel plans months ahead of time. Besides needing to decide how to get to
the race, you have to secure a place to stay. For the most part, cities that put
on races with 35,000 or more runners will sell out of decent hotel rooms
--- PAGE 237 ---
soon after race registration closes. Indeed, hotel rooms sometimes sell out
as fast as the race entries. No doubt, you’ll want a reasonably comfortable
bed both before and after the race.
Many runners, especially first-timers, choose to sign up for a local race
to avoid the extra costs and hassle associated with traveling. Even if your
race is local, you still may want to consider getting a room. While sleeping
in familiar surroundings is attractive to some, others would rather stay at a
nearby hotel the night before so they can easily walk to the start line the
next morning. There are a couple of advantages to this strategy. You are
able to get a bit more shut-eye before rising for the big day. Too, if you are
someone who gets stressed by the influx of crowds and chaos surrounding
race morning, you might find walking just those few blocks to the start line
eases your anxiety. If you prefer to sleep in your own bed the night before,
be sure to leave early enough to get to the start. Although you may live only
15 minutes from where the race begins, traffic and parking can be a
nightmare in any city on race day morning. Consider having someone drop
you off so you don’t have to figure out where to park.
STRATEGIC SPECTATING
Most runners welcome a friendly, familiar face along the course. It not only
breaks up the monotony but also gives you something to look forward to as
you grind through 13.1 miles. Despite this, don’t spend time worrying about
where and when you’ll meet your family or friends. The best strategy here
is to put someone else in charge. For the 2012 Olympic Trials marathon, I
reserved hotel rooms and purchased plane tickets for my parents, but
beyond that, my wife took care of the details. She set up itineraries, flew
down to Houston with my parents, and made sure they got to their hotel.
Beforehand she helped figure out where to find me along the course and the
spot where we would meet at the finish. She knew that I needed to focus on
my race during the days leading up to marathon weekend, so she picked up
the slack and allowed me to forgo dealing with certain arrangements that
were likely to stress me out. Consider this point person your captain and
allow him or her to take control of details you would rather not handle.
In terms of where to direct your personal cheering squad along the
course, it depends on what support you think you will need, and when. For
--- PAGE 238 ---
some, the race is over in an hour or hour and a half, so it makes sense for
your cheering quad to pick a spot that’s close enough to the start to allow
them to also get to the end and watch you finish. Alternately, you may want
to have that support at a point where things may feel pretty grueling—
maybe at around 10 miles. If you are in that latter group, seeing a friendly
face, hearing words of encouragement, or being handed a special snack may
be just the ticket at that late point in the race to get you through to the finish
line. In this case, consider splitting up your cheering squad so that you also
have someone waiting to watch you cross the finish line.
STUDY THE COURSE
Knowing the race course is a big advantage. If your race is local, consider
getting out and running sections of the route periodically so you know what
to expect come race day. If you know the turns, hills, and various other
details of a course, a sense of familiarity is established. With familiarity
come calm and control. The athletes in the Hansons-Brooks Distance
Project will often take a trip to where we will be racing to run the course a
few times. Doing this early in the training segment allows us to alter what
and where we do our training to be fully prepared for the course. If you
don’t have the luxury of running the course prior to competition, check the
official race website, YouTube, and the blogosphere for course tours and
reviews.
Race weekend
THE RACE EXPO
Most race expos are akin to bustling flea markets. I’ll admit that I
sometimes love wandering the aisles, browsing the latest running shoes,
gear, and goodies. Despite this, I urge you to avoid spending any length of
time on your feet at the expo, a common mistake I see many runners make.
They are in awe of the pageantry surrounding the big event, so they stand
around on hard concrete floors in the convention hall instead of resting on
their couch or hotel bed. For most Sunday races, the expo is open Friday
--- PAGE 239 ---
and Saturday. If this is the case and you are able, go during your lunch hour
on Friday and pick up your packet. This keeps you from lingering too long,
so you can have a relaxed pre-race day. If you can’t make it to the expo
until the day before the race, go as early as possible to avoid the crowds and
then get the heck out of there so you can go somewhere and put your feet
up.
PRE-RACE DINNER
Whether you’re attending an organized pre-race pasta dinner or staying
home with your family to eat, the guidelines are the same. Most important,
carbo-loading doesn’t mean having four plates of spaghetti and three loaves
of bread. Eat a regular-sized meal, but make sure it’s healthy and high in
easily digestible carbohydrates. The main goal is to top off those glycogen
stores prior to the race. This is actually a goal for the last few days leading
up to the race, so don’t treat your pre-race dinner as your main source of
carbo-loading. Indeed, this meal should cap off a balanced week of eating
as suggested in the nutrition chapter; otherwise your pre-race dinner won’t
make much difference. Practice ahead of time by eating the same meals
before your long runs so you know what to expect on race day.
Additionally, while hydration is an ongoing process, make sure you use the
day before the race to continue taking in water and sports drinks. Proper
hydration takes time and should be tended to throughout the week.
BEFORE BED
Use the evening prior to the race to make sure all your t’s are crossed and
i’s dotted. Your drop bag should be packed and ready to go, the timing chip
fastened to your shoe, your clothes laid out, and your water bottle full.
When you head to bed, chances are that sleep will be fairly hard to come by.
Don’t fret if you are tossing and turning. You should have banked plenty of
rest over the past 10 days. If you do find yourself awake, consider grabbing
a midnight snack, like an energy bar or a piece of fruit. While this isn’t
necessary, the body burns through about half of the glycogen stored in the
liver during the overnight hours. By eating a late night snack, you further
reduce how much you need to replace in the morning, potentially avoiding
--- PAGE 240 ---
stomach upset. If you get especially nervous right before a race, this is a
good way to consume calories before the jitters set in. Instead of needing
300–500 calories in the morning, you may be able to reduce that to just
100–200 calories to top off glycogen stores.
RACE MORNING
What you eat for your race morning meal depends on when you wake up.
It’s not uncommon for a runner to have trouble sleeping the night before a
big race, so getting up early is often better than staying in bed and
overanalyzing your race plan. The amount of time needed for digestion
depends on the person; some runners need 3 full hours to digest a meal
before running, but others only need 1. If you wake up 3 hours or more
before the race, you can get away with chowing down on a normal
breakfast, like a bagel with peanut butter, a banana, and coffee or juice. Any
closer to gun time, however, and you need to be more conservative. As
discussed earlier, within a few hours of the start, eat less solid food and
mostly carbohydrates. With an hour to go, stick with something like an
energy gel, which will satiate you for a short time but won’t give you a full
feeling. Furthermore, begin measuring your liquid intake by sips, not
ounces. The last thing you want is to have water sloshing around in your
stomach during the first half of the race. Eliminate wild card scenarios by
planning everything from where you’ll stand in the start corral to which
port-a-john station you’ll utilize. Hold on to your water bottle in the corral
and continue sipping as you wait for fun time.
In addition to what you’re putting in your body, you must consider what
you’re putting on it. Check the weather forecast for both before and during
the race. If you end up standing in the corrals for 30 minutes or more, you’ll
want to be prepared. Weather in a spring or fall race can be unpredictable—
often unseasonably warm or unseasonably cold. At the Detroit Marathon
and Half-Marathon, for example, which is held in October, the weather can
vary from 80-degree heat to near-blizzard conditions whipping across the
Detroit River. Most years, the temperatures hover between 30 and 40
degrees, making wardrobe choices particularly tricky during the early
morning hours. While your legs may go numb standing around before the
sun fully rises, you’ll feel fine once you begin running. This means that
--- PAGE 241 ---
you’ll need to wear layers to stay warm prior to the start, but then be able to
easily shed garments as you warm up during the race.
One of the most common questions among runners in our training
programs is whether they should wear nice running gear that they’ll have to
carry with them or something old they don’t mind tossing to the curb. The
Hansons solution is simple: Wear something you’re willing to lose. For
your bottom layer, sport your regular running gear with the race number
attached, but over that, wear an old pair of sweatpants from the bottom of
your dresser or a sweatshirt you wore to paint the living room. When you
begin to warm up, which you will, you can throw off the top layer without a
second thought. Just make sure to pin your number on the layer that you
don’t plan to take off during your race.
MENTAL PREPARATION
In my experience, the best way to mentally prepare yourself prior to a race
is simply to be calm. Getting your heart rate up before you even start
running is never a good idea. A good way to find that calm is to approach
the race with “cautious confidence.” Step back and spend a moment
thinking about your training, reminding yourself that you are fit and ready
to race. Training doesn’t lie. Be realistic in pondering the difficulty of the
race, but also remind yourself that all your training has prepared you to
handle it.
Why does this approach work? For one, it forces you to slow down and
accept that the task at hand is going to be hard and at times is going to hurt.
This keeps you cautious to the point of avoiding overzealous pacing right
out of the gate. In addition, when the going gets tough during the race, you
are prepared for it. You knew it wasn’t going to be a cakewalk. By
preparing this way, you are able to have positive and motivating thoughts
ready and waiting to help you endure.
Race protocol
RACE TIME
--- PAGE 242 ---
Race time is go time. Once the starting gun goes off, it’s time to cash in all
those hard-earned chips. The most common question we get about race
strategy regards mile splits. We have already discussed the physiological
reasons behind pulling back on the reins and running a conservative pace
the first half of the race, but there is more to it than that. Throughout
training, many of your workouts are focused on running particular paces.
We strongly believe in the truth attached to the old adage “Race the way
you train,” and we have emphasized even pacing during workouts in hopes
of getting the same result on race day. More specifically, the training is
meant to prepare you to run fairly predictable splits throughout, with the
second half of the race slightly faster than the first, called a negative split
strategy. We remind runners that going out slow will almost never cause
any lasting damage to your overall pace, but starting too fast might. If you
go out way ahead of pace and begin to fade, not only will your body feel the
strain, but your mind also takes a beating as you get passed by other runners
who started slower.
What’s more, every current world record from the 5K to the marathon
has been set via negative or even splits. Most PRs are set that way too.
When you start out at a pace you can maintain and then find yourself
passing other runners who overestimated their abilities, you’ll discover a
newfound confidence in the later stages of the race. While many runners
say that they feel the best at the beginning of the race and want to capitalize
on that by banking time early on, this approach nearly always ends in
disaster. A half-marathon is a substantial number of miles, and what feels
like a comfortable pace at mile 2 may not feel so great at mile 10.
While you should remain steadfast in your race plan in most
circumstances, flexibility may be required. Sometimes a fast result at the
end of the day depends on getting lucky with a few variables, in particular,
weather. It can be disappointing to train your hardest only to be met by 80-
degree heat, hurricane winds, or even a monsoon. I know. I’ve been there
and have the less-than-satisfying race times to prove it. In these situations,
which will surely affect your race performance, it is easy to feel that all is
lost. While there are plenty of quantifiable gains from training for a half-
marathon, even if the stars don’t align for a great race day, not being able to
run your best performance can be heartbreaking. But weather is not
something you can control, and you have to make the best of the situation. I
--- PAGE 243 ---
remember facing challenging conditions during my senior year of college at
the NCAA Cross Country Championships. It was so frigid that day that we
actually had a team meeting to discuss the possibility of frostbite in an area
you would least want to have frostbite. I remember the announcer giving us
the 2-minute warning before the start and then saying, “It’s a balmy 9
degrees, and with the wind chill, it’s negative 13!” These were not ideal
conditions, to be sure, and I was disappointed that the weather was not in
my favor, but I wasn’t going to let it stop me from putting forth my best
effort. If your race day presents challenging conditions, remind yourself that
everyone else is facing them, too. Take some time and consider the real
reasons you decided to train for a half-marathon in the first place and the
numerous benefits and personal growth that have resulted from training.
Surely it is not a total loss, even if you have to adjust for a slower pace.
In the same way that we have emphasized smart training, you also must
be wise about your race strategy. If the forecast has thrown a wrench in
your original plans, alter the course of action accordingly to ensure you
reach the finish line in one piece. From a temperature standpoint, you can
expect to slow down anywhere from 5 to 8 seconds per mile when the
temperatures reach the 60s and higher. Generally speaking, you would
likely run 5 seconds slower per mile at 60 degrees, 10 seconds slower at 70
degrees, and 15 seconds slower at 80 degrees. This, of course, can depend
on a number of factors. For instance, if you have been training in the heat
for months, it’s not going to affect you as much as it does other runners.
The same goes for smaller runners as well as highly trained harriers. When
it comes down to it, weather-related adjustments of expected finishing times
vary depending on the individual.
RACE FUEL
For many runners of the half, the race day mantra to remember is simply
this: Fuel and hydrate early and often. That said, you may be able to get
away with less of both, depending on your speed. Unlike in the marathon,
where a race can be made or broken on appropriate fueling, fueling for the
half could have either a huge impact on the outcome or very little. A lot
depends on how quickly you will complete 13.1 miles. If you are going to
be on the course for less than 90 minutes, then fueling and hydration are a
--- PAGE 244 ---
lesser concern during the race. At this pace, you will be finished with the
race before your glycogen stores are depleted; you just need to make sure
they are full at the start. If they are, you can be confident that you can finish
strong without crashing into that brick wall that sometimes jumps out
unexpectedly at runners on the course.
On the other hand, if you are running for 2 or more hours and fail to fuel
properly along the course, you may find yourself feeling seriously drained
well before the finish line. You will need to carefully consider your fueling
plan, and the importance of starting calorie and fluid replacement early in
the race cannot be stressed enough. Consider this: For elite runners, bottles
of fluid containing each runner’s own concoctions are generally placed
every 5 kilometers. Physiologists tell us that the stomach can handle about 8
ounces of fluid every 15 minutes or so, which is about how long it takes
elite men to run 5 kilometers. For the other 99.9 percent of runners who
don’t arrange access to their own bottles, there are water stops every 2 miles
or so in most half-marathons. This means that if you take a cup of water or
sports drink at every water stop, you’ll be taking in fluids at about the same
rate as the elites. The cups that are offered are usually 6–8 ounces, and they
are generally filled with about 4–6 ounces of fluid. When you take into
account average spillage, a runner can get 2–3 ounces at each station.
Whether or not you stop or just grab a cup on the go is up to you. But
remember, getting in the fluid and calories is of the utmost importance. A
couple of seconds spent stopping to refuel or hydrate can actually save
minutes in the long run by helping to prevent bonking. At each station, we
suggest getting a cup at one of the first tables and then perhaps a second cup
at the last table. In my experience, the calories offered in sports drinks are
as important as the fluid itself. When runners “hit the wall,” it’s because
they are out of sugar, and the sugar in sports drinks can help combat this
occurrence. The only time this isn’t an appropriate choice is if you have just
taken a sports gel (or equivalent), which should be washed down with
water. This will put you right in line with what most elites consume during
an average half-marathon. While the sports drink is the best option in most
cases, get your hands on whatever you can.
MIDRACE PACE ADJUSTMENTS
--- PAGE 245 ---
Over the years we’ve witnessed many runners who have gotten either
significantly ahead or behind their desired paces early in the race. This is
often a side effect of the crowded streets at the beginning of the race.
Sometimes a runner will dash out at a clipped pace, in the hope of getting
ahead of the crowd. In other cases, a runner is held back by the crowd for a
few miles, and once out of the throng, he or she speeds up in hopes of
getting back on track, making for extremely inconsistent mile splits. For
instance, a half-marathoner with a 9:00-minute per mile goal pace may be
slowed by the mob of runners leading the pack, causing him to run closer to
9:20 pace for the first several miles. As the crowds thin out around the 10K
mark, he may feel he needs to make up for lost time, increasing his speed to
8:45 pace instead of getting back to the original plan of running 9:00-
minute miles. As you have probably guessed from what we’ve said about
pacing, this is a dangerous way to try to gain time. Instead, get settled back
into your planned race pace and gradually pick it up over the next several
miles to conserve energy and set yourself up for a strong second half.
Although you may feel great the first half of the race, that doesn’t give
you the green light to pick up the pace. I can’t tell you how many runners I
have seen cross the halfway point far ahead of schedule, only to crash and
burn in the later miles. If adrenaline gets the best of you in the early stages
of the race, prompting your pace to be faster than planned, don’t panic. Just
fix it. Slow down to goal pace and find the rhythm that will carry you for
miles on end. Focus on your own race and try not to get caught up in what
other runners are doing. If someone breezes past you, assume you’ll catch
him or her later on. In many cases, that’s exactly what will happen.
Race day checklist
shoes and socks
singlet and/or sports bra
shorts
water/sports drink
race number
--- PAGE 246 ---
timing chip
pins or race number belt
energy gels
watch
sunglasses
hat
lip balm and/or sunscreen
post-race clothes
towel
toilet paper or tissues
antichafing lubricant (Bodyglide™ or petroleum jelly)
Band-aids to protect nipples (for the guys)
gloves/arm warmers
throwaway shirt and/or pants
money
equipment check bag
directions to start and pre-race instructions
When you head to the start line, we recommend consolidating
everything you might need that you’re not wearing into a clear bag, which
is usually provided to you by the race. After the Boston Marathon tragedy,
seemingly more and more races are providing these and making mandatory
gear checks a security measure. Take everything with you to your waiting
area, and then take only what you need to the starting corral. Leave the rest
at the bag check station.
--- PAGE 247 ---
11
Post-race recovery
TRAINING USING THE HANSONS Method ends with your half-
marathon, the culmination of 18 weeks of hard work. What happens after
the race depends on the individual runner and his or her level of running.
For example, a high-mileage veteran competitor may run a couple of half-
marathons in a single training block. In contrast, a newbie may be
completely wiped out and not ready to do another event in the near future.
For the purpose of this chapter, let’s discuss post-race recovery in terms of
your half-marathon being the culmination of training and the end point of a
training segment.
Taking time off from running after the race is important because it gives
your body time to restore glycogen and hydration levels to normal. In
addition to being depleted of all fuel sources, your exercising muscles feel
the burn. How much and what kind of pain you feel the day after your race
can vary; however, it’s common to feel stiff, sore, and supremely worn-out.
The half-marathon breaks down your muscles on a microscopic level,
leaving them in need of rest and repair. Consider the following your plan of
action as soon as you cross that finish line.
Immediately after the race
It often happens that a runner reaches the finish line and then wonders,
“Okay, now what?” We spend so much time focusing on training and
racing, it is easy to forget to think about what comes after you reach the
finish line. No matter what the clock says, as long as you gave the race your
best shot, that’s all that matters now. Take those first moments after the race
to revel in the fact that you took your body to the edge and made it to the
finish. Allow yourself a moment to be proud of this major accomplishment.
--- PAGE 248 ---
Along with those positive feelings will most certainly come soreness and
exhaustion. You may even think you will never do a race again. But while it
can hurt, it’s also true that after that first race, many runners are hooked.
First 30 minutes
The same general rules you follow after a workout also apply after your
half-marathon. Regardless of your finish time, immediate action toward
your recovery is crucial and will have a significant impact on when you can
return to running. Although you may wince at the thought of eating, you
need to try to consume some calories right away. The good news is that you
can pretty much eat anything you are craving. It is the calories that are
important, not their source. This is a good thing because you usually can’t
be picky when it comes to finish line fare. Whatever they are offering, take
it. Because you have depleted much of your available muscle and liver
glycogen, your body will bounce back far sooner if you do. What’s more,
your blood glucose is low, or on the verge of being so, you’re dehydrated,
and you have few remaining electrolytes. The faster you start replacing
these nutrients, the sooner you’ll be feeling back to normal. That window of
optimal recovery time is small, so take advantage of the goodies in the
finish chute that first 30 minutes after the race.
The first 2 hours
Once you have gathered your hardware and snacks, you can leave the finish
chute and find your family and friends. As long as you have had something
to eat and drink, you don’t need to worry about consuming a full meal until
your stomach settles down. If it isn’t a hometown race, go back to your
hotel, get cleaned up, and put on some comfortable clothes (and
comfortable shoes, such as flip-flops or sandals). By that point you may be
ready to sit down for lunch. Although you are probably tired of pasta, focus
on taking in a high percentage of carbohydrates to replace all that lost
glycogen. If you still aren’t ready for a feast, steadily consume calories to
get in a good amount over time. At this point, try to choose more nutritious
--- PAGE 249 ---
foods to get your system back on track. Fruits, vegetables, and whole grains
are all great options, along with water, fruit juice, or sports drinks. Again,
the details you take care of now will help you down the line.
The rest of the day
Continue to hydrate and replace calories as desired. Put your feet up and
relax for a few hours; you’ve earned it! Regardless of ability and how hard
you pushed yourself during the race, you will likely notice at least some
soreness over the rest of the day and into the following morning. Those first
steps out of bed the day after the race may be labored, and walking up and
down stairs may be an unpleasant challenge. From elites to weekend
warriors, no one escapes a hard race without a little soreness. Besides the
glycogen depletion, the structural integrity of the muscles has been
compromised, so don’t plan any big outings right after your race. In my
experience, your first half-marathon dishes out the most difficult recovery.
The more you run over time, the easier the recovery seems.
The next 5–7 days
Don’t run at all during this time. Some of you may be thinking that you
don’t need time off, but remember that we are approaching this from a long-
term development standpoint. With long-term development, we take
planned rest time now, and we can avoid unplanned rest time later on! We
have learned that taking a break from running is generally very beneficial.
Not only should you not run, but you also should avoid putting any new
races on the calendar. Some runners fall into a cycle of jumping back into
mileage just a few days after a big race, often leaving their legs feeling stale
a month down the line. Instead, take the time off now, recover completely,
and then go back to running. Enjoy the break and use this occasion to catch
up on the things that took a backseat during training. Instead of worrying
about your next workout or fitting in a long run, you can sleep in, read the
newspaper, and regain some balance in your life. If exercise is a must, limit
--- PAGE 250 ---
it to light aerobic activity such as cycling, using an elliptical, or something
else that’s not completely weight bearing.
After 1 week
Following your week’s vacation, it’s time to start running again. For first-
time half-marathon finishers, we don’t like to specify a time line for your
return, other than to advise you to be cautious. Most veterans are itching to
get running again after a week of rest. Although we love seeing this
enthusiasm, one of the problems we often encounter is runners who want to
begin planning their next race before they are even through the finish line
chute. It is good to have goals, and we are always glad that a runner wants
to continue training, but make sure you keep these plans flexible. For
newbies and veterans alike, it is important to wait and see how recovery
goes in order to avoid rushing back to running too soon.
Once you have established that you’re fully recovered and ready to get
back into your routine, we advise starting with an easy running regimen.
Upon your return, you may be stiff, and those first few runs may be more
difficult than usual. Don’t worry; you haven’t lost as much ground as you
think. A week off will have decreased your fitness minimally. I am not
saying you’ll feel amazing on your first run back, but trust me, your fitness
is still there. For new runners, try starting with 3–5 miles (about 30
minutes) every other day or so. The first week might look like the schedule
in Table 11.1.

--- PAGE 251 ---
Veteran runners can be more aggressive in their return, but their effort
should still be based on how the body reacts to resumed training. An
experienced runner’s body is probably more accustomed to endurance
training, making the comeback somewhat easier. Even so, every runner is
different, and you should pay attention to what your body is telling you
after your race. If something doesn’t feel right or you are struggling to
regain your form, we recommend backing off and letting the body heal
itself. When you are ready to start some easy running again, a sample week
for a veteran runner might look like the schedule in Table 11.2.
For all runners, resistance training can be picked up two or three times
each week. This should be done on days that you won’t be doing SOS
workouts in the upcoming weeks, allowing you to get into a routine. For
example, if you know that in the future you’ll be doing SOS workouts on
Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday, establish your resistance training days on
Monday, Wednesday, and/or Friday. By starting the regimen at this time,
you can build running-specific strength without doing a single workout for
several weeks.
After following the aforementioned mileage for the first week back in
training, you might consider bringing things up a notch for the second
week, although your running should still be all easy mileage. This is
dependent on how your body responded to that first week. If you are feeling
refreshed and looking forward to getting back on track, add a bit of mileage.
The beginner should add 2 days with 30-minute runs, bringing the weekly
total to 5 days of 30-minute runs each. Advanced runners can add time to
--- PAGE 252 ---
each of their running days, aiming for 45–60 minutes of easy running, 6
days a week. If you are still feeling sore and tired, however, give yourself
another week to linger at the lower mileage and let your body and mind
recover.
Four to 6 weeks after the half-marathon
After those first 2 weeks of easy running, you should spend the next 2
weeks building mileage, allowing for a slow return to typical training
volume. The Advanced Program peaks at about 50 miles, but the average
mileage is around 40 miles per week, and the Beginner Program averages
slightly less at 30–35 miles per week. The Just Finish Program is in the 20–
25 miles per week range. Once you are comfortably running “average”
weekly mileage again, you can begin structured training and start to draw
up plans for new goal races. Whatever you choose to do, a training segment
doesn’t always need to adhere to an 18-week time frame. You may find that
as you become more experienced, the length of time you need to prepare for
a half-marathon can be shortened by a few weeks. In most cases, a speed or
base-building segment can be 10–14 weeks. The more weekly mileage a
person is able to tolerate, the shorter those training segments often need to
be.
The great beyond
The question at this point is where to go from here. Many runners feel they
need to get right back into half-marathon training, others may go back to
shorter distances races, and still others will take the leap into marathon
training. If you choose the last option, consider using a program from
Hansons Marathon Method. The training plans are based on the same
building blocks as our half-marathon plans, which will ease your transition
to this new distance.
The downtime following your race offers an excellent opportunity to sit
back and consider the timing of your long-term goals. For runners who just
completed the Beginner Program or Just Finish Program, this can be an
--- PAGE 253 ---
ideal time to build up mileage and perhaps gradually enter a more ambitious
training regimen for a spring half-marathon. If that first race went well, this
time gives you the chance to safely and slowly put mileage on your legs,
preparing you for the increased training. The opportunities vary from runner
to runner and can change as the seasons allow or geography permits.
Some runners decide to capitalize on the fitness base they have just built
by dedicating a training segment to shorter races. As far as 5Ks and 10Ks,
this is a great way to build speed and keep your legs feeling fresh rather
than simply going right back into training for longer races. A 10-week
speed section is especially well timed for runners who have just finished a
half-marathon but want to return to the shorter races. These runners are
strong from the half-marathon training, and a little shot of speed will make
them faster overall.
Finally, half-marathoners may use the race and the accompanying
training as a catalyst to build their mileage further and continue increasing
their workouts in order to tackle the marathon distance. That can work well
for the runner who did a spring or early summer half-marathon and wants to
make the turnaround to do a fall marathon. The same is true for a late fall or
early winter half-marathon; a runner who has completed this distance can
take on a spring marathon without worry. Whatever your choice, the
experience you gain from the half-marathon distance will be helpful in any
other running or racing you decide to do.
--- PAGE 254 ---
Appendix A
The Elite Program: Hansons-Brooks Distance
Project
When Kevin and Keith Hanson took their experience and expertise to the
elite running world in 1999, there was a significant shift at hand within the
sport, with several competitive training groups springing up across the
country with a shared mission of supporting American postcollegiate
runners. Over the years, the African nations had begun to dominate distance
running, leaving other countries, such as the United States, to step back and
reevaluate how they trained their Olympic hopefuls. Accomplished and
successful coaches, the Hansons knew they had the necessary tools and
training methods to assist elite runners in their pursuit of international
success. Thus the Hansons-Brooks Distance Project came to fruition.
Performances in the half-marathon of current and former Hansons-
Brooks runners rival those of any elite program in the country. In the years
since first forming, the squad has had 12 top 10 finishes in the USA Half
Marathon Championships, including one champion with Brian Sell. Even
more impressive, the team can boast 11 members of the IAAF World Half
Marathon Championship squads. And yet, when you consider the project’s
roster of athletes, they have something interesting in common: Only a few
of them were truly great runners in college. The lesson here is that
development and success take time. While the majority of the runners
recruited by the Hansons-Brooks Distance Project were only average to
good collegiate athletes, many have gone on to achieve great success under
the same training principles on which our programs in this book are based.
For another perspective on the building blocks upon which your training
will rest, you may find it interesting to explore the related elements that are
important to the elite runners we train. This not only dispels myths about
--- PAGE 255 ---
how high-level runners actually train but also reveals the similarities
between your own training and that of Olympians and Olympic hopefuls.
Just as we stress long-term development in this book’s three training
plans, so too do we focus on the long term in our Elite Program. Setting our
sights on success far down the road is our goal when runners join the team.
Indeed, Kevin and Keith seek to develop a runner over months and years,
not cultivate a one-hit wonder who is prone to overtraining and burnout.
The key to a runner’s development, regardless of level, is patience.
Allowing the body time to adapt to its current level before jumping to the
next level is crucial. Appropriate work coupled with patience will yield the
desired outcome and best results.
Because the half-marathon is a unique event of strength and speed,
many of our postcollegiate runners simply need time to adjust from college-
style workouts and seasons and develop into road racers. Taking time to
build mileage and strength while maintaining their “college legs” (most
college programs focus on 5K and 10K speed, since that’s what they
compete at) means that it may be a few years before they really become
lethal at the half distance. For many of our elites, the half will ultimately
serve as a stepping-stone between their 5K and 10K days and the full
marathon.
While the underlying principle of long-term development underscores
all our half-marathon training programs, there are some outward differences
between the training programs in this book and the Elite Program. For
starters, the lives of most readers vary greatly from the existence of elite
athletes, and our training plans appropriately reflect those differences.
Despite the distinctions, however, you may be surprised to discover that
your training isn’t as different from that of an elite runner as you may have
thought.
Elite Program components
9-DAY TRAINING CYCLE
In the early days of the Hansons-Brooks Distance Project, the weekly
training cycle was similar to the plans within these pages. Elites ran a track
--- PAGE 256 ---
workout on Tuesday, a tempo-type workout on Thursday, and then a long
run on Sunday. Along the way, we switched to a 9-day training cycle that
looks something like this:
SUNDAY // long 16–20 miles
MONDAY // easy 10–12 (a.m.); easy 4 (p.m.)
TUESDAY // same as Monday
WEDNESDAY // tempo run 8–10 miles (or some variation)
THURSDAY // same as Monday
FRIDAY // same as Monday
SATURDAY // track 5 miles’ worth of speed about 10K pace
SUNDAY // same as Monday
MONDAY // same as previous Monday
The training mileage for an Elite Program runner remains fairly steady
all year. For example, when I train for a marathon, my weekly volume
ranges from 110 to 140 miles per week; when I am preparing for shorter
races, my volume is still 100–120 miles per week. Within this mileage,
traditional long runs every week are not always necessary. Because the
volume of the easy days is 10 to 12 miles, or 1:10–1:24 in terms of time,
runners gain many of the same desired aerobic adaptations as they would
from a regular long run. This high mileage makes the 9-day cycle
particularly advantageous because it allows for adequate rest while still
working all the systems that are important to half-marathon development.
WEEKLY VOLUME
In looking at the example of a 9-day training stint in the Elite Program, you
may have noted that the mileage is significantly higher than in the training
plans in this book. While the Advanced Program peaks at around 50 miles
per week, male elites will reach 120 miles per week, and female elites will
hit 100–110 miles per week. When it comes to the elite training, there are a
number of factors built into the plan that make such high mileage tolerable
and productive.
The first factor is time. We aren’t referring to 24 hours in a day or 7
days in a week, but rather the years of previous training that have slowly
--- PAGE 257 ---
allowed for an increased volume of mileage. While most runners entering
the development program aren’t running more than 100 miles per week, the
majority of them are logging 80–100 miles. The increased mileage makes
the 9-day cycle especially important because instead of asking a 22-year-old
runner to jump into 120-mile weeks with three hard workouts per week, the
frequency of SOS workouts is cut to every third day, giving that runner the
chance to increase volume through easy days. Sometimes the extra mileage
hurts a runner’s performances initially, but over time, adaptations occur,
leading to steady improvements.
The second factor concerns recovery. In addition to fitting in more
mileage at easier paces, the 9-day cycle allows for steady recovery between
SOS workouts. Even with these extra recovery days, cumulative fatigue
plays an important role in the Elite Program, but it is also balanced with
injury prevention. When the volume of an easy day reaches between 16 and
20 miles, that extra day between SOS workouts is necessary to provide
added recovery. Although these days are classified as “easy” in the Elite
Program, they are often run at approximately marathon pace. For example,
during peak mileage of training, easy runs are typically completed at a pace
of 6:00–6:30 per mile, and long runs at about 5:30–6:30 per mile. The
majority of runs are 1:45 to 2:00 minutes per mile slower than goal race
pace. The other factors that make this higher-volume program manageable
are the inherent benefits that go along with being part of a structured
training group, like the Hansons-Brooks Distance Project. While all the
runners in the program have another job in some capacity (besides running),
their schedules allow them to take naps throughout the week, in addition to
getting 8–10 hours of sleep a night. Let’s face it, if you had the opportunity
to take a 2-hour nap a couple of times per week, you’d probably be able to
handle more weekly mileage too. The high mileage is also made easier by
having running shoes from Brooks, keeping us outfitted through the miles.
Additionally, our athletes have the advantage of access to chiropractors,
physical therapists, and other medical professionals who understand runners
and the unique injuries and issues related to the sport.
SOS WORKOUTS
--- PAGE 258 ---
Along with a higher overall volume of mileage, the mileage contained
within SOS workouts is higher. This means that the volume of SOS mileage
is proportionate to the overall training plan, whether you’re looking at the
plans in this book or at the Elite Program. By breaking down each SOS
workout, you’ll see how similar the Elite Program is to the ones we
recommend here.
THE LONG RUN // Runners in the Hansons-Brooks Distance
Project complete 20-plus-mile long runs, even during a half-
marathon training segment. This is because mileage is based on
percentage of weekly volume and the time it actually takes to
complete the long run. In a typical 120-mile week, a 20-miler
represents about 16–17 percent of the weekly volume. For me, a 20-
mile long run takes between 1:55 and 2:10, which falls well within
the guidelines we have described. On the other hand, a 16-mile long
run completed by someone running 70 miles per week will account
for approximately 23 percent of the total weekly volume. Typically,
that 16-mile long run will take around the same 2:00-hour duration,
eliciting virtually identical metabolic and physiological adaptations,
despite the difference in actual miles.
SPEED SESSIONS // In the Beginner and Advanced Programs, the
speed sessions total 3 miles of fast running. Generally you’ll be
running around 30–50 miles per week when you do these workouts,
which means that speed will account for roughly 7.5 percent of the
weekly volume. Meanwhile, the absolute volume of a speed session
in the Elite Program is typically around 6 miles. With a weekly
volume of 120 miles, that represents 5 percent of the total weekly
volume. Again, the principle is the same: Speed represents a small
percentage of weekly training while we focus on developing aerobic
capabilities through sub–lactate threshold work.
STRENGTH SESSIONS // Strength sessions are a vital part of
half-marathon development, regardless of the level of training. In
the Beginner and Advanced Programs, these sessions include 6
--- PAGE 259 ---
miles of hard running to be completed during 40- to 50-mile weeks,
accounting for 10–13 percent of weekly volume. In the Elite
Program, strength workouts are usually between 9 and 12 miles,
which is 10–11 percent of total weekly volume within a 120-mile
week. Once again, absolute volume is greater, but the percentage of
SOS mileage completed during the training week is proportionate
across programs.
TEMPO RUNS // At its peak, the 7-mile tempo run is about 15
percent of weekly volume in the Beginner and Advanced Programs.
The Elite Program also includes 7-mile tempo runs, meaning that
this work makes up 12 percent of the weekly volume. The
percentage here is slightly lower as a result of the variations in the
tempo runs that the elite runners complete, to be discussed later. For
the half-marathon, this is where the elite program differs the most.
The elite program focuses more on longer intervals at race pace with
short recovery, but total volume may be higher than doing a
traditional tempo run.
ELITE PROGRAM WORKOUTS
Some signature workouts in our elite marathon program have gained
national attention, such as the Simulator (26K tempo run) and the infamous
2 × 6-mile workout. However, with the half-marathon program, what we
ask runners following the Beginner Program and the Advanced Program to
do doesn’t look that different from what the elites do, except for total
volume. A few workouts that are staples in the Hansons training arsenal are
worth mentioning here. Whatever we are training for, you’ll see these
workouts somewhere along the way in the elite program!
LONG RUN VARIATIONS
THE STEADY-STATE EFFORT // This is one of my personal
favorites because it involves a high level of concentration, reduces
boredom associated with repetitive training, and also stimulates
--- PAGE 260 ---
important aerobic adaptations. I use this with runners who are
experienced but can’t feasibly increase their mileage because of
other obligations and constraints. Scheduled well into training, when
a runner’s fitness is established, this workout begins like any other
long run. Gradually the intensity increases until the athlete is
running about 30 seconds slower than goal marathon pace, or about
1 minute per mile slower than half-marathon pace. That speed is
then held for 50–75 percent of the run. By forcing the body to run at
a significant effort, nearing the tipping point between using mostly
fat and drawing upon those highly coveted carbohydrates, the
aerobic threshold is stimulated. Because the body wants to conserve
carbohydrates, it begins to adapt to that pace and maximize its fat-
burning capabilities. Pacing precision is important here because if
runners go too hard, they hit the wall prematurely, but if they run too
slow, they miss out on some of the desired effects. This workout is
also a good mental exercise because it is a long, tough effort that
requires an athlete to maintain focus for an extended period.
TEMPO RUN VARIATIONS
THE CUTDOWN // Between 10 and 12 miles in length, this
workout starts at a pace of 6:00 minutes per mile for the elite men in
the program, which is within our easy range, and decreases by 10-
second increments to half-marathon pace. A typical cutdown
workout looks like this: 6:00, 6:00, 5:50, 5:40, 5:30, 5:20, 5:10,
5:00, 4:50. From experience, I can tell you that this workout often
feels easy at the beginning, but it becomes increasingly challenging
with each passing mile.
4 AND GO! // This is an 8-mile tempo run during which we run the
first half at marathon pace and the second half either at a designated
faster pace, usually half-marathon pace, or simply as fast as we can
go. The goal is to start comfortable and finish fast!
--- PAGE 261 ---
STRENGTH WORKOUT VARIATIONS
2 MILES, 8 × 800, 2 MILES // This is a combination workout,
where we run 2 miles at half-marathon pace. After a ½-mile jog, we
then engage in 8 × ½ mile at a 10K pace with a short recovery. Then
we will finish the workouts with another 2 miles at half-marathon
pace. The goal is to stay at or above that lactate threshold point for
much of the workout while changing turnover in the legs a little bit.
It’s a great workout, since the half-marathon is a blend of speed and
strength, and this really teaches a runner to deal with discomfort.
Sample training log for Elite Program
The following program (Table A.1) is a log of my training for October 2010
to February 2011, as I prepared for the Rock ’n’ Roll Mardi Gras Half-
Marathon. While this is tailored to my individual needs, it is a typical half-
marathon training program for a veteran runner who is part of the Hansons-
Brooks Distance Project. The only real difference in what our elite women
runners do relates to pace, as they also run 100 or more miles per week
during part of their half-marathon training. You’ll notice that there are no
big secrets when it comes to training an elite runner. In fact, the principles
used are the same for everyone.
--- PAGE 265 ---
Appendix B
--- PAGE 267 ---
Index
The index that appeared in the print version of this title does not match the pages in your e-book.
Please use the search function on your e-reading device to search for terms of interest. For your
reference, the terms that appear in the print index are listed below.
Page references followed by f denote figures. Page references followed by t denote tables.
Achilles tendinitis, 169, 217
Adaptations, 14–16, 28, 30, 52, 65, 132, 141, 264, 266
described, 11–12
easy running and, 52–56, 58
heart strengthening, 28–31, 81
long runs and, 62, 63–65
speed workouts and, 67–70
strength workouts and, 80–83
to stress, 16, 24–25, 28, 45, 51, 65
Advanced Program, 102, 113t, 147, 149
described, 112–113, 118
mileage for, 52, 130–131, 255
training schedule, 114t–117t
Aerobic capacity, 11, 12, 32, 56, 67, 105, 146, 193
Aerobic metabolism, 15, 16, 20, 22, 35–36, 37, 54, 57, 67, 80, 90, 112, 190, 264
Aerobic threshold, 11, 37–42, 94
Anaerobic metabolism, 23, 32, 35, 36–37, 56, 69, 80, 186
Anaerobic threshold, 11, 12, 20–21, 80, 82, 90, 94
described, 35–37
increasing, 11, 12, 13, 20, 37, 56, 68, 81, 105
pace, 11, 12, 36–37, 82
Apparel, 232–234, 240–241
Arches, 216–218, 220, 221
Arm swings, 163
Back, stretch for lower, 170
Back extension, 176
Back injuries, 169
Balance, 13–14
Beginner Program, 102, 147, 149, 230
described, 103–107
mileage for, 130, 255
--- PAGE 268 ---
speed progression, 72
training schedule, 108t–111t, 134t–135t
Blood, 28–31, 55, 81, 139, 158, 191, 196, 197, 234
Blood glucose, 201, 250
Bounders, 167
Bridge, 177
Burnout, 44, 63, 106, 260. See also Overtraining
Butt kicks, 166
Calories
burning, 207–208, 208t, 210
calculating needs, 181–184
consuming, 180–184, 202, 205, 211, 239–240, 245–246, 250, 251
serving recommendations for, 182t–183t, 184
stored, 209–211, 210t, 211t
Calves stretch, 171
Capillaries, 22, 23, 24t, 30–31, 45, 55, 62, 68
Carbohydrates, 185–188, 195, 196, 200–203, 209. See also Glycogen
consuming, 185–186, 188, 205–206, 239, 240, 251
importance of, 186–188
source of, 185–186, 202, 204
stores of, 16, 38, 39, 40, 187, 202, 205, 209–211, 210t, 211t
use as fuel, 22, 31–32, 38–40, 39f, 54, 186–188, 190, 207–211, 208t, 266
Cariocas, 167
Checklist, race day, 247
Chest stretch, 171
Clothing, 232–234, 240–241
Conflicts, adjusting for, 134–136
Consistency, 14–15, 45, 178
Cooldown, 57, 83, 91, 104, 105, 126, 131, 150
Costill, David, 63
Course, studying, 238
Crosstraining, 59–60, 157, 158–161
Crunch, 175
Cumulative fatigue, 7–17, 51, 61, 91, 97, 106, 124
Cushioning, shoe, 220, 222, 223, 227, 232
Cutdown (tempo run), 266
Daniels, Jack, 62–63
Deep venous thrombosis, 234
Dehydration, 192–196, 199
Delayed onset muscle soreness, 234
Diet, 181, 184, 185, 189, 190, 205. See also Nutrition
Easy runs/days, 8–9, 13, 50, 59–60, 125, 133, 136, 137–141, 196, 263
Advanced Program, 114t–117t, 130–132
Beginner Program, 108t–111t
--- PAGE 269 ---
benefits of, 15–16, 52–56, 53f
described, 52–60
guidelines, 56–59, 58t–59t
Just Finish Program, 120t–123t
pace, 11–12, 54, 56–57, 58, 97, 98t
in weekly schedule, 58–59, 58t–59t, 61
Eating. See also Nutrition
post-race, 250–251
pre-race, 204–206, 239, 240
what and when to eat, 198–204, 199t
800 repeats, 75t
Electrolytes, 35, 191, 193, 197, 201, 251
Elite Program, 259–273
components of, 261–267
sample training log for, 267, 268t–273t
training cycle, 9-day, 261–262
Endurance, 13, 22, 23, 27, 35, 56, 90, 119, 139, 185, 192
Endurance training, 32, 50, 90
benefits of, 28–32, 29t, 254
fat-burning and, 38, 189–190
long runs and, 63–64
Energy, 20, 21, 23, 35, 37–42, 45, 54, 61–63, 186, 190–192, 210
Enzymes, 31, 41, 45, 54–55, 97
Even split strategy, 89, 243
Exercises, 163–168, 170–174, 175–177
Fast-twitch (Type II) fibers, 21–27, 24t, 25t, 53–54, 62, 163, 168, 174
Fatigue, 15–17, 35, 63, 80, 91, 95, 96, 107, 126, 174, 224
cumulative, 7–17, 51, 61, 91, 97, 106, 124
muscle fiber types and, 23, 24t, 27, 53–54, 62, 67
Fats, 38, 187, 188–190, 210t, 211t
burning, 11, 16, 22, 26, 31, 37–42, 39f, 54–55, 62, 90, 112, 187, 190, 200, 207–208, 208t, 211,
266
importance of, 189–190
sources of, 189–190
stores of, 38, 54, 189
Fitness, 16, 68, 96, 105, 133, 140, 159–160, 253, 266
5K, 20
post-half marathon race, 256
race equivalency chart, 152t, 154t
speed workout pace charts, 73t–79t
training intensity pace chart, 99t, 100
weekly mileage, 9, 9t
Flexibility, 161–174
Fluids
absorption of, 195–196, 201
consuming, 186, 194–201, 203, 205, 240, 244–246, 251
--- PAGE 270 ---
loss, 193–194, 197, 199–200, 207
Foot strike, 214–218
Foot types, 216–219
Forefoot strike, 215, 225
4 and Go! (tempo run), 267
400 repeats, 73t
Fractional utilization of maximal capacity, 81
Freshness, 15, 17, 58, 96, 161
Gait analysis, 228–229
Gear, 213–234
Gels, 201–203, 208, 240, 246
Genetics, muscle fibers types and, 22, 26, 52–53
Gluteal stretch, 172
Glycemic index, 203–204
Glycogen
depletion, 15, 38, 54, 63, 68, 139, 186, 188, 193, 250, 251, 252
rebuilding, 16, 63, 205, 249, 251
saving, 26, 37, 40, 42, 81
stores of, 16, 26, 62, 68, 188, 193, 207, 209, 239–240
Goals, 20, 49, 59, 80, 90, 95, 101–106, 118, 124–125, 130, 133–134, 138–140, 206, 207, 253, 256
adjusting, 151, 156
pace charts and, 73t–79t, 85t–88t, 98t–99t
race, 138–140, 145–156
setting, 14, 148–150, 255
SMART, 146–147, 156
Grapevine, 167
Groin stretch, 172
Half-squat, 164
Hamstrings stretch, 173
Hansons-Brooks Distance Project, 1, 10, 50, 132, 259–261, 263–264, 267
Hansons Marathon Method (book), 2, 129, 256
Hansons Method, 1–4, 7–17, 27, 37, 45, 50, 56, 59, 61, 63, 66, 69, 71, 89, 91, 96, 101, 129, 158
Heart, strengthening, 28–31, 81
Heart rate, 16, 29, 192, 199
Heat stroke/exhaustion, 193
Heel counter, 221, 222
Heel strike, 215, 225
Hemoglobin, 55, 68
High knees, 166
Hills, 50, 149
Hip circles, 164
Hip flexors/quads stretch, 173
Hips stretch, 173
Hydration, 192–198
dehydration, 192–196, 199
--- PAGE 271 ---
pre-race, 205, 206, 239
during race, 244–246
restoring, 249, 250, 251
what and when to drink, 198–204, 199t
Hyponatremia, 197–198
Illness, adjusting for, 136–141
Injuries, 66, 126, 158, 169, 225–226, 231
adjusting for, 136–141
crosstraining during, 158–159, 160
overpronation and, 217
overstriding and, 215
preventing, 58, 169, 174, 178
rate trend in, 225–226
risk of, 63, 69, 83, 103, 105, 106, 107, 118, 135, 162, 168
shoes and, 223–225, 231–232
supination and, 217–218
Intensity, 26, 51, 103–105, 118, 133, 141, 204
calorie expenditure and, 207–210
as cumulative fatigue component, 10–13
of easy runs, 16, 54, 56
energy sources and, 16, 38, 39f, 54
increasing, 9, 10, 266
pace and, 10–13, 94f, 97–100, 98t–99t
of speed workouts, 65, 70
of strength workouts, 80, 82
tapering, 95–97
training intensity chart, 97–100, 98t–99t
Intermediate fibers, 23, 26, 67, 81, 163, 168
Just Finish Program, 102, 103, 118–119, 120t–123t, 130, 133, 140, 146–147, 149, 255
Lactate (lactic acid)
buildup, 12, 35–36, 80, 81, 82, 83, 199
production and clearance of, 36, 39f, 42, 80, 81–82, 233–234
threshold, 11, 20, 36–37, 264, 267
Ladder pace chart, 78t
Leg kicks, 165
Leg swings, 165
Long runs, 13, 50, 52, 57, 80, 125, 134, 136, 137, 161, 252
Advanced Program, 112–113, 113t, 117t
Beginner Program, 106–107, 109t, 111t
benefits of, 61–62
described, 60–61
distance based on weekly mileage, 64t
duration based on pace per mile, 65t
Elite Program, 264, 265–266
--- PAGE 272 ---
guidelines, 62–65, 64t, 65t
Just Finish Program, 121t, 123t
pace, 63–65, 65t, 99t
in weekly schedule, 58, 59t
Low back stretch, 170
Lydiard, Arthur, 7
Marathon, 3, 13, 18, 20, 98t–99t, 256–257
Martin, Dave, 63
Mental preparation, 241–242
Midfoot strike, 215, 216, 225
Midsole, 219–220, 222, 227
Mileage. See also Training volume
base miles, 102, 133
as cumulative fatigue component, 8–10
for Elite Program, 261–265
increasing, 9, 10, 17, 57–61, 118, 125, 130–133, 254–256, 260
junk, 11, 13, 42
post-race, 253–255
tapering, 95–97, 107
weekly, 8–10, 9t, 50, 51f, 61, 63, 103–107, 112, 125, 130–132, 161, 255, 262–263
Mile splits, 242–243
Mitochondria, 11, 22, 23, 24t, 31–32, 38, 41, 45, 54–55, 68, 90, 112, 190
Motor unit, 22, 26
Muscle(s), 21–27
adaptations of, 65
breakdown of, 64, 69, 190, 249, 252
contraction, 22, 23, 23t, 35, 37, 53
engagement, 168
fatigue, 15–16, 35
glycogen stores, 15–16
strength, 16, 62
Muscle fibers, 21–27, 112
conversion of, 24–25
fast-twitch (Type II) fibers, 21–27, 24t, 25t, 53–54, 62, 163, 168, 174
intermediate fibers, 23, 26, 67, 81, 163, 168
slow-twitch (Type I), 21–27, 24t, 25t, 52–54, 62, 67, 168, 211
Myoglobin, 67–68
Negative split strategy, 89, 242–243
Noakes, Tim, 63
Nutrition, 179–192. See also Carbohydrates; Fats; Protein
calorie consumption, 180–184, 182t–183t
fueling plan prior to race day, 204–206
race fueling strategy, 206–211, 208t, 210t, 211t
what and when to eat, 198–204, 199t
--- PAGE 273 ---
1K repeats, 76t
1-mile repeats, 85t
1.5-mile repeats, 86t
Overload principle, 50–51
Overpronation, 217, 222
Overstriding, 215–216
Overtraining, 7, 9, 12, 15, 44, 51, 63, 65, 103, 106, 135, 156, 160–161, 260
Oxygen, 45, 199. See also VO2max
delivery of, 22, 28, 30–31, 55, 67, 81
running economy and, 42–43
utilization, 67, 80
Pace, 12, 26, 38, 50, 51, 104–106, 148, 193, 200, 207, 263, 266
anaerobic threshold, 11, 12, 36–37, 82
of easy runs, 11–12, 54, 56–57, 58, 97, 98t
foot stride and, 216
how to pace workouts, 94–95, 94f
intensity and, 10–13, 94f, 97–100, 98t–99t
internalizing, 89, 91
of long runs, 63–65, 65t, 99t
midrace adjustments, 246–247
physiological adaptations and, 11, 56
race, 242–244, 246–247
running economy, 42–45
of speed workouts, 68–69, 71–72, 73t–79t, 94–95, 94f, 99t
of strength workouts, 81–84, 83t, 85t–88t, 94–95, 94f, 99t
of tempo runs, 89–91, 93t, 94f, 95, 99t
Pace charts
for speed workouts, 73t–79t
for strength workouts, 85t–88t
for tempo runs, 93t
Performance, 27, 32, 36, 139, 150
diet and, 186, 187, 189–190, 199
foot strike and, 214
hydration and, 196, 199
pace and, 89
running economy and, 44–45
strength training and, 174, 178
sweat loss and, 192–193
Physiology. See also Adaptations
aerobic threshold, 11, 37–42
anaerobic threshold, 11, 12, 20–21, 35–37
of easy running, 52–56
of long runs, 61–62
marathon, 19–45
running economy, 42–45
running-specific muscles, 21–27
--- PAGE 274 ---
of speed workouts, 67–68
of strength workouts, 80–82
of tempo workouts, 90–91
VO2max, 12, 27–35, 29f
Plantar fasciitis, 217
Post-race recovery, 249–257
Posture, 216
Preparation
mental, 241–242
pre-race, 236–238
race day checklist, 247
race weekend, 238–242
Pre-race preparation, 236–238
Pronation, 217
Protein, 190–192
Race day checklist, 247
Race equivalency chart, 150–151, 152t–155t
Race expo, 238
Race protocol, 242–247
midrace pace adjustments, 246–247
race fuel, 244–246
race time, 242–244
Races, adjusting for, 132–134, 134t–135t
Race tactics, 235–247
pre-race preparation, 236–238
race day checklist, 247
race protocol, 242–247
race weekend, 238–242
Race weekend, 238–242
before bed, 239–240
mental preparation, 241–242
pre-race dinner, 239
race expo, 238
race morning, 240–241
Range of motion, 161–162, 169, 174
Recovery, 8, 140, 159
active, 12, 15–17
crosstraining during, 159
diet and, 191–192
on easy running days, 10, 61
in Elite Program, 262–263
incomplete/partial, 15, 61, 97
post-race, 249–257, 252t–255t
in speed workouts, 65, 69–70, 82, 104, 105
in strength workouts, 82–83
training intensity pace chart, 98t–99t
--- PAGE 275 ---
Runners, categories of, 2–3
Running economy, 42–45, 56, 67, 80, 90, 231
Scheduling runs, 15
Shin splints, 169
Shoes
choosing, 213–214, 227–230
construction, 219–221
cushioning, 220, 222, 223, 227, 232
foot types and, 216–219
pricing, 226–227
race day, 231–232
replacing, 230
stride biomechanics and, 214–216
types, 221–226
wear pattern in, 228
Shoe types, 221–226
lightweight, 222–223
minimalist, 223–226
motion control, 222
neutral, 222
racing flats, 223, 224, 231–232
stability, 222
Shoulder stretch, 170
Side bends, 164
Side plank, 177
Simulator, 265
600 repeats, 74t
1600 repeats, 71, 79t
Slow skipping, 165
Slow-twitch (Type I) fibers, 21–27, 24t, 25t, 52–54, 62, 67, 168, 211
Something of substance (SOS) workouts, 13, 50, 52, 57, 58, 96, 106, 112–113, 124–127, 130, 132,
133, 136, 137, 149–151, 160, 184, 196, 223, 232, 254, 262, 263, 265. See also Long runs; Speed
workouts; Strength workouts; Tempo runs
Specificity, 59, 158
Spectators, 237
Speed progression chart, 72
Speed workouts, 13, 50, 124–125, 127, 133, 136, 162, 224
Advanced Program, 113, 114t, 118
Beginner Program, 104–106, 108t
benefits of, 67–68
described, 65–67
duration of, 69–70, 71
Elite Program, 264
guidelines, 68–72, 72t–79t
importance of, 66
Just Finish Program, 120t
--- PAGE 276 ---
pacing, 68–69, 71–72, 73t–79t, 94–95, 94f
physiology of, 67–68
post-half marathon race, 256
recovery in, 65, 69–70, 82, 104, 105
running economy and, 44
in weekly schedule, 58, 58t
Sports drinks, 195, 197, 199, 201–202, 205, 245–246
Sprints, 168
Strength progression chart, 84
Strength training, 174–178
Strength workouts, 12, 13, 50, 125–127, 135, 138–140, 162, 254
Advanced Program, 113, 116t
Beginner Program, 106, 110t
benefits of, 80–82
described, 80
Elite Program, 264–265, 267
guidelines, 82–84, 83t
pace and, 81–84, 83t, 85t–88t, 94–95, 94f, 99t
physiology of, 80–82
recovery in, 82–83
speed workouts compared to, 68–69
Stress, 55, 71, 82, 224, 236
adapting to, 10, 17, 24–25, 28, 45, 51, 65
Stretching, 161–174
dynamic, 162–168
static, 168–174
Stride
biomechanics, 214–216
lengthening, 215
minimalist footwear and, 224
overstriding, 215–216
Superman, 176
Supination, 217–218
Sweat loss, 191, 192–193, 199, 275t–276t
Sweat rates, 192–193, 199
Tapering, 95–97, 107
Tempo runs, 12, 13, 44, 57, 80, 82, 97, 125–127, 131, 133–134, 136, 137, 162
Advanced Program, 113, 114t, 116t, 118
Beginner Program, 105–107, 108t, 110t
Elite Program, 265, 266–267
Just Finish Program, 120t
pace, 89–91, 93t, 94t, 95, 99t
physiology of, 90–91
progression charts, 92
in weekly schedule, 58, 58t, 61
workout guidelines, 91
--- PAGE 277 ---
workouts described, 89
Tendinitis, 169, 217
10K
post-half marathon race, 256
race equivalency chart, 152t, 154t
speed workout pace charts, 73t–79t
training intensity pace chart, 99t, 100
10-mile run, 113, 113t
3-mile repeats, 88t
Training
consistency, 14–15, 45, 178
crosstraining, 59–60, 157, 158–161
flexibility, 161–174
marathon, 3, 13, 18, 20, 60, 256
optimal, 45
philosophy, 7–18
reducing, 95–97, 204–205, 226
strength, 174–178
supplemental, 157–178
varying, 13, 49–50
window, 149
Training intensity chart, 97–100, 98t–99t
Training programs, 101–127
balance in, 13–14
components, 49–100
easy runs/days, 52–60, 53f
Elite Program, 259–273
FAQs, 124–127
modifications, 129–141
racing during, 125–126
Training schedule, 58–59, 58t–59t
Training volume, 12, 64, 106–107, 112, 134, 146, 161. See also Mileage
easy runs, 52, 55–56
in Elite Program, 262–263
reducing, 95–97, 141, 204–205
running economy and, 43–44
strength workouts, 80, 82, 83t
tapering, 95–97, 107
of tempo runs, 91
Travel, 236
Tread, shoe, 219, 220
Treadmills, 32, 40f, 41f, 42, 159
1200 repeats, 77t
2-mile repeats, 87t
Underpronation, 217
--- PAGE 278 ---
Volume. See Mileage; Training volume
VO2max, 12, 29f, 36, 56, 139, 193
calculating, 32–35
central components of, 28–29, 29f
described, 27–35
energy sources and, 38, 39f, 40, 207–208, 208t, 210
improving, 28, 56, 62, 68, 105
of long runs, 63
myoglobin development and, 68
pace versus intensity and, 94–95, 94f
peripheral components of, 29f, 31–32
running economy and, 42, 43f, 45
speed workouts and, 68–69, 71
strength workouts and, 82
treadmill tests, 32, 40f, 41f, 42
Warm-up, 57, 91, 104, 105, 126, 131, 150, 162, 163
Water. See Fluids
Weight, gaining, 174, 205
Weight loss, 181, 199–200, 203
Wet test, 218
Workouts. See also Training; Training programs; specific programs
eating and, 198–204, 199t
modifying, 124–127, 135
pacing, 73t–79t, 85t–88t, 94–95, 94f
training intensity chart, 97–100, 98t–99t
Zatopek, Emil, 213
--- PAGE 279 ---
About the authors
Luke Humphrey began running track in middle school and hasn’t slowed
down since. After several all-state performances in high school, Luke ran
for Central Michigan University from 1999 to 2004. There he was part of
several NCAA Division I top-25 cross-country teams, including a 9th-place
team finish in 2002. In 2004, Luke competed in his first marathon at the
LaSalle Bank Chicago Marathon in the fall of 2004 for the Hansons-Brooks
Distance Project. He ran a debut time of 2:18:46 and was 18th overall.
Since then Luke has gone on to finish 11th in the 2006 Boston Marathon,
11th in the 2008 ING New York City Marathon, and 12th in the 2010 Bank
of America Chicago Marathon as well as to qualify for two U.S. Olympic
Trials for the marathon (2008 and 2012). Luke holds a personal best of
2:14:38 in the marathon. He has a B.A.A. in exercise science from Central
Michigan University and an M.S. in exercise science from Oakland
University. Luke began Hansons Coaching Services in May 2006 to help
runners of all abilities reach their running goals. He is the author of
--- PAGE 280 ---
Hansons Marathon Method. He and his wife, Nicole, have a daughter,
Josephine.
Keith and Kevin Hanson are cofounders of the Hansons-Brooks Distance
Project, together coaching the Olympic development team to victories on
national and international stages. They also co-own the Hansons Running
Shops and avidly support, build, and encourage the running community,
coaching hundreds of local runners to their first or 100th marathon.