
--- PAGE 2 ---
 
 
The Science of Running
 
 
How to find your limit and train
to maximize your performance
 
 
 
 
--- PAGE 3 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 4 ---
Steve Magness
http://www.ScienceofRunning.com
--- PAGE 5 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 6 ---
 
Copyright © 2014 by Stephen Magness
All rights reserved. This book or any portion thereof may not be reproduced or used in any
manner whatsoever without the express written permission of the publisher except for the use of brief
quotations in a book review or scholarly journal.
First Printing: February 2014
ISBN 978-0-615-94294-0
Origin Publishing
www.ScienceofRunning.com
Cover design by Mike Sayneko
www.SayenkoDesign.com
--- PAGE 7 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 9 ---
 
 
 
 
 
To Gerald Stewart, Tom Tellez,
And my family, Bill, Elizabeth, Phillip, and Emily
 
--- PAGE 10 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 11 ---
Table of Contents
Preface
Introduction
 
Section 1: The Science of Distance Running
Chapter 1: How Running Happens
Motor Programming
Muscle Contraction
Energetics
Muscle Fiber Types
A Recruitment Issue
Passive Mechanics
Chapter 2: Fatigue: Friend or Foe?
How Fatigue manifests itself
How Fatigue occurs
Oxygen’s role
Chapter 3: The Brain: The Master Controller
Violating Homeostasis
Playing Mad Scientist
Neurophysiology
The Role of Feedback
Perception of Effort
Chapter 4: An Oxygen Problem?
The measurement: VO2max
Oxygen intake, transportation, and utilization
The VO2max limiter
Chapter 5: The Fallacy of VO2max
How the VO2max concept developed
Efficacy of basing training paces off of VO2max
Should we train to improve VO2max?
Chapter 6: Lactate, Acid, and other By-products
Buffering/Dealing with high acidosis
The Lactate Threshold
Lactate Testing
--- PAGE 12 ---
 
 
Chapter 7: Efficiency
The Measurement: Running Economy
Biomechanical Efficiency
Neuromuscular Efficiency
Metabolic Efficiency
Problems with Running Economy
Chapter 8: The Brain-Muscle Connection
Neuromuscular and Anaerobic factors in performance
Fatigue and the CNS
Temperature Regulation
The Psychology of it all
Chapter 9: The Genetics of Training
Steps of Adaptation
Long Term Adaptation
Training Applications
Chapter 10: Theories of Training Adaptation
General Adaptation Syndrome and Dose-Response
Individuality of adaptation
Chapter 11: Volume and Intensity of Training
Volume and Intensity of Training
Interaction of Volume and Intensity of Training
Training in the Real World
Training Frequency
Chapter 12: Periodization
Periodization in Endurance Sport
Individualization
Chapter 13: Where Do We Go From Here?
 
Section 2: How to Train
Chapter 14: The Philosophy of Training
Knowing the Adaptation
Amplifiers and Dampeners of Adaptation
Balancing Act
--- PAGE 13 ---
The Goal of Training
Chapter 15: What are We Trying to Accomplish
Models of Fatigue
General to Specific: A classification system
A different kind of Base: Training intensity interaction
Periodization
Chapter 16: Creating and Manipulating Workouts
Steps for workout design
Choosing the right direction
Chapter 17: Individualizing Training
The Slow Twitch vs. Fast Twitch model
How fiber type impacts each training workout
Finding your fiber type the easy way
Chapter 18: Defining the Workouts
Mileage, Distance runs, and Recovery runs
Long Runs, Tempo, and Threshold Running
Sprints, Interval, and Repeat Workouts
Specific Endurance Development
Chapter 19: Bringing it All Together: Periodization
The big picture- Periodization within a Career
Within Season Periodization
Within days/weeks Periodization
Peaking
Finalizing the Plan
Chapter 20: Training for Each Event
800m
1500m/1mile
5,000m
10,000m
Marathon
Chapter 21: Special Workouts and Strength Training
Strength Endurance-The Key to kick development
Creating a MaxLASS at Race Pace
Strength Training for the endurance athlete
Chapter 22: The Biomechanics of Running
 
--- PAGE 14 ---
Appendix: Workout examples and progressions for each workout
type
References
About The Author
 
--- PAGE 15 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 16 ---
Preface
The serious, committed runner is neglected. There are very few
books, magazines, or even advertisements aimed at the runner looking to
maximize performance. Instead, the running industry has focused on the
recreational runner. The endless supply of articles explaining ‘how to run
your first marathon’ or ‘how to run your best 5k on 3 runs per week’
dominates the magazine articles and the bookshelves. We were all
beginners at some time, so it is no knock on those who need such
information to get started. However, as we get further and further from the
recreational runner, the resources become increasingly sparse.
For the highly competitive, elite, college, or serious runner looking
to maximize performance, the options are few and far between. Unless
you are lucky enough to call some elite runners or high-level coaches
friends, the information on how top runners train is limited. My aim is to
blow the doors wide open and provide the details that I’ve accumulated
through running myself, coaching high-level runners, working with great
coaches and studying practically every elite coach in running history. My
hope is that the information on training provided will not only help you
maximize your or your athlete’s running performance but also lead to
better and more innovative training practices. We have a long way to go
until the training process is figured out, and hopefully, this book serves as
not a final destination but as a stepping-stone and catalyst for future
improvements in training.
The first section focuses on the details on the science of running.
This section had its origins as an in-depth literature review for my
Master’s thesis, but due to outside circumstances, I could not use it.
Instead of letting it go to waste, it served as the foundation of the Science
section of the book. Similar to the training section, I felt that the running
physiology that was available in the mass media was “dumbed down”. I
set out to look at everything we knew about the science of running and
offer a critical review of that information. Most running science books
take an explanatory approach. Instead, my goal was to try and answer the
question “what limits running performance?”
Despite my background in sports science, this section was not
written from a scientist’s point of view. Instead, I wanted to look at the
--- PAGE 17 ---
science from a different perspective, that of a high-level athlete and
successful coach. This allowed me the unique opportunity to analyze
everything as a member of two opposing groups, a coach, and a sports
scientist. What caught my attention was the level of disagreement between
the two groups and the degree in which they worked seemingly oblivious
to the other group. There are exceptions of course, but it blew my mind
that I would read paper after paper about the benefits of low mileage/high-
intensity training and how the Kenyans success was based on this system,
while at the same time coaches were espousing the complete opposite and
having phenomenal success with that approach. The two groups, real-
world application vs. laboratory science, seem to work independently of
each other without either group acknowledging the others work.
My hope is that this book will serve to bridge the gap. The coaches
will get in-depth scientific knowledge and a new training paradigm for
distance running, while the sports scientists will get a look at what
actually works with runners in the real world. I hope that you find this
informative, useful, and above all, thought-provoking.
 
-Steve Magness
www.ScienceofRunning.com
 
--- PAGE 18 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 19 ---
Introduction
This is not your typical watered-down mass-market training book
that relies on cookie-cutter programs. There will be no formulaic training
regimes or easy to follow training plans included. Instead, this book is
designed to challenge the athlete, coach, or scientist. It is designed for
those looking to not solely get better, but instead to maximize their
performance. That doesn’t mean it is only for the elite, quite the contrary:
it is for those of you who, like me, were frustrated with the redundant
information given out in every coaching and training book. My hope is
that this book will provide new insight and direction in the world of
running, and make the reader think critically about all of the traditional
notions held in coaching, running, and science.
In the world of running, the science and the practical side are at war.
Research scientists constantly lampoon the coaches for their lack of
reliance on the training methods proven in their research studies to
improve performance, while coaches ridicule the scientists for having no
idea how the body works in the real world and laugh at their training
ideas. Read enough from both sides and you’ll see how far apart they are.
Whether it’s training volume, intensity, frequency of runs or even peaking
strategies, the sides are so far apart on a variety of key issues that it is
laughable. Most coaches and scientists give up on trying to understand the
other side and instead delve deep into their own beliefs while simply
ignoring what the other side is doing. Both sides go about their days
seemingly oblivious to the others work, so what we end up with is two
completely contrasting theories on all things running.
I’m here to attempt to integrate both worlds. My goal in this book is
to show you that while one side might be clued in a little better, we cannot
reach the limits of human performance without understanding both sides.
While this task might seem daunting, I’m uniquely qualified for this role
as I’ve been on both sides of the coin. I started this sport as a phenom high
school runner, running the 6th fastest High School mile time in U.S.
history. That early promise quickly disappeared, as my college career was
a wreck, marred with overtraining and injuries. Looking for solutions I
turned to studying the best coaches in the world in distance running, both
--- PAGE 20 ---
past and present. Not completely satisfied with their answers, I turned to
trying to learn everything there was about the science of running,
eventually completing my master’s in the subject. In studying the science,
I looked at it through an athlete’s and coach’s perspectives and couldn’t
help but notice the contradictions between what I had learned as an
athlete, coach and in studying other coaches and what I was being taught
in class. Unlike what often happens where your prior notions give way
and you accept the dogmatic teachings of your chosen field, I couldn’t let
go of either the coaching or science side, thus creating a constant struggle
between the two. When I started coaching others I had to confront this
struggle and it came to me: there’s a place for both: they just have to be
integrated properly.
This book is split into two sections, one focused on the Science side
and one on the coaching side. What is unique about this book as that I
have worked hard to integrate the two competing sides by providing the
opposing sides’ view and the practicality behind that information. The best
coaches and Sports Scientists are those who actually understand both sides
of the coin. Instead of two separate groups working independently along
parallel paths, we need a unified understanding so that we can all work
together towards helping athletes run faster and more efficiently.
Understanding how we run and how the body adapts to training
allows for the development of better methods of coaching and training.
Without this knowledge, coaches get stuck in the “followers” pattern,
meaning they copy workouts from others for the sole reason that another
coach did it. My goal is to instill independent thinking and above all to get
other runners and coaches to start asking questions.
In a surprising twist, knowing the science opens up the door for the
coach to be an artist. You learn to utilize the natural responses of the
human body to solve problems in ways that the traditional coaching model
would never allow for. Let me give a few quick examples. In 2009, my
best runner was recovering from a case of mono while still trying to get in
shape to win a state championship. I needed a way to get him in specific
shape very quickly without overstressing his body. Without being able to
do longer runs or traditional intervals like 800m repeats because it
overstressed his weakened system, I used my scientific knowledge to
come up with workouts that would accomplish the same sort of goals but
--- PAGE 21 ---
be less stressful and easier to recover from. Instead of traditional intervals,
he ran a lot of very short intervals at moderate speeds with short rest
between intervals and then a long break between sets. This allowed him to
spend a larger amount of time at race pace and to build his aerobic system
gradually while keeping the stress low.
Two of history’s great running coaches were experts at integrating
science and training. Italian coach Renato Canova used his knowledge of
muscle fiber recruitment to develop a method that uses hill sprints and
strength endurance circuits to teach the runner to recruit more muscles and
then extend their endurance. By knowing the science, he knew that muscle
fibers began to “fail” at the end of the race and that if he could increase
the total fiber pool and then extend their endurance; this would enhance
his runners’ performance. Similarly, the great Hungarian coach Mihaly
Igloi used his knowledge of muscle fibers to theorize that if runners
changed their stride patterns from what he called a short swing to a long
swing pattern, they would switch the muscle recruitment pattern and thus
be able to delay fatigue slightly. This ingenious idea of being proficient in
two slightly different ways of running has largely been forgotten but
shows the value of having scientific knowledge. In essence, knowing the
science frees you from the constraints of the “followers” coaching method.
Once you know how the body works, your imagination can run wild and
you can then solve the problems that you face in coaching your athletes.
Hopefully, by now, you see the benefit of knowing both sides. While
this book is primarily focused on how to train runners and maximize their
performance, it would be impossible to accomplish that task without the
science, as I hope you will come to understand. On the scientific side, my
goal is not just to explain the research, but also to take a critical look at it,
supplying context to the research and explaining what it means in practical
terms. On the coaching side, this is not a paint by numbers training book,
so instead of telling you exactly, what workout should be done when the
goal is to teach you how to train using a method that elite runners and
coaches use.
Before getting into the meat of the book, I’d like to go over what I
call my rules of everything and my rules of training. The rules of
everything are a series of tenets that I’ve developed over the years that
should be kept in mind when evaluating the scientific research, new
--- PAGE 22 ---
training ideas, equipment, and fads. Their purposes are to help you as the
coach to make better-informed decisions. These go beyond just looking at
science or even training and can be applied to a vast array of different
situations. My rules of training are some simple overarching concepts that
boil down the complex task of training into several succinct statements. I
introduce them now so that you have some knowledge of my training
philosophy while reading the science section of the book.
--- PAGE 23 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 24 ---
 
 
My Rules of Everything:
 
1. Hype Cycle- When an idea is new or gains popularity, it
follows a cycle of initial overemphasis before eventually leveling off
into its rightful place.
It does not matter whether the idea is new or being recycled if it
goes viral or reaches fad-like status, chances are that more importance will
be ascribed to it than it really deserves. As something gains importance, it
is easy to take one of two extremes and either jump on the bandwagon or
discard the idea as worthless. The reality is that its importance is
somewhere in between, and you must not let its fad status cloud your
objective judgment. Eventually, the fad will wear off, and the idea will
slowly settle down into its rightful level of importance. Worthwhile ideas
tend not to have as dramatic a fall and stick around longer.
 
2. Research is only as good as its measurement.
If the measurement system is flawed or relies on false premises, then
the subsequent research or ideas that develop based on that measurement
are flawed. This happens all the time in science and explains why there is
so much conflicting data out there. We only read the conclusions and
results without considering the theory or measurement on which it is built.
Therefore many conclusions based on scientific data lead to incorrect
conclusions and bad practices. Prime examples of this that will be
discussed thoroughly in the text are VO2max and Running Economy.
 
3. We overemphasize the importance of what we can measure
and what we already know while ignoring that which we cannot
measure and know little about.
Every new breakthrough brings about euphoria as if this will be the
finding that makes everything clear. This happens in medicine, nutrition,
biology, genetics, you name it. Whenever something new is discovered or
a new measuring device is developed, there is a corresponding increase in
--- PAGE 25 ---
interest and thus subsequent study on that subject or using that
measurement tool. What happens is that new info or measurement tool
receives so much importance that it defines which way the field goes.
 
4. We think in absolutes and either/or instead of the spectrum
that is really present.
The common saying goes “The world is not black and white.” The
human mind seems to prefer simple analog, yes or no, type thinking. This
can be seen throughout exercise science and training. Some common
examples include muscle fiber types and an infatuation with finding the
one limiter of performance or that magical workout that maximizes
performance. One of my favorite examples is the nature versus nurture
debate. For decades all we heard was that genes controlled everything,
then research and books like Malcolm Gladwell’s Outliers came along and
told us that it is almost purely nurture that makes us great and all we need
is 10,000 hours of practice. The reality is that it is not this black and white
and that it is a combination of nature and nurture that combine to
determine our “talent” and success.
 
5. We underestimate the complexity of the human body (and
almost everything else).
I’m painting with a broad brush here, but as humans we are
arrogant. It’s easy to get caught up and think that we have all the answers
and have everything figured out. The truth is we don’t. In every field of
study, there is much to be learned. Be very wary of anyone who claims to
have everything figured out. You don’t have to look very hard to find
numerous instances in our field of exercise science to see the constant
underestimation of the human body.
 
6. We look at and analyze things from our perspective,
overemphasizing what our knowledge base strength is.
As is becoming a theme, many of these rules have to do with our
human nature. The goal is to be aware of these rules so that you don’t fall
into the trap, thus freeing yourself to think critically and creatively. In this
instance, our background and perspective play a large role in how we see
things and it is important to be aware of that. This is why sprint coaches
--- PAGE 26 ---
think all distance runners run too much and should do more biomechanical
work, and why many distance coaches think that sprinters are “lazy” and
don’t do enough work. The important thing to realize is that you should
avoid this trap and try to analyze ideas and concepts from an outside
perspective.
 
7. Everything works in cycles.
This rule applies to almost everything, whether it is science or
training as discussed in this book or fashion trends. Everything comes and
goes in a cycle. It’s important to understand this and not to ditch a
particular training method that works just because it is going out of style.
Look at the history of preferred running mileage in America and this trend
can obviously be seen with low mileage programs being given in the
1940-50’s and late 80’s and 90’s while high mileage predominated in the
60-70’s and the 2000’s. Similar trends can be seen with static versus
dynamic stretching, weight training, core training, and even exercise
equipment such as bells. Remember not to just follow the crowd for the
sake of change.
 
8. Taking the extreme view is seldom good.
Lastly, once again whether it’s training, science, or topics such as
religion, taking an extreme view is seldom good. This statement ties into
the rule of how everything is not black or white but really a spectrum.
Similarly, taking extreme views on anything seldom turns out to be right.
In training, for instance, it’s obvious that all high mileage slow running is
not going to work; just as all high-intensity low mileage isn’t either. A
recent example of the dangers of taking an extreme view in training can be
seen in the Cross Fit phenomenon.
 
My Rules of Training:
1. Build and Maintain
It is easier to maintain a quality than to build it up. Thus each
particular training parameter should go through a cycle of being
emphasized to build it up, and once its emphasis decreases, a small
amount of training should be done to maintain it.
--- PAGE 27 ---
 
2. Never leave anything behind
Tying into the last principle, the emphasis given to each training
parameter changes, but it is never completely taken away. The goal of
training is to build on top of what has been done previously, not leave it
behind and forget about it.
 
3. Progress everything
Training is giving a large enough stimulus that it creates an
adaptation. In essence, training is completely changing a person, all the
way down to the genetic level. If the same stimulus is given over and over,
the body’s response is less and less. Since training fundamentally alters a
person, how they adapt and respond to a stimulus changes too. Therefore,
if trying to build a certain parameter, progression is paramount to ensuring
continual adaptation. This applies not only on a small-scale workout-to-
workout level but also on a large-scale career level.
 
4. Balance
Training is the process of balancing seemingly opposing
adaptations. In the simplest form, balancing speed and endurance is the
key to proper training. The exact balance depends on the person and the
event they are training for.
 
5. Individualize
Every runner is an individual and should be treated like one. Their
physiology and psychology will change what type of training they need
and it is a disservice to the runner to give the same training to every runner
and expect the same results. We must treat each runner as an individual.
 
6. Take complex things and make them simple
A great coach once told me that good coaches take complex ideas
and make them simple, while a bad coach who wants to appear like they
know what they are doing takes ideas and concepts and makes them more
complex. It is good to know the complexities of training or science, but
you must break them down into simpler and easier to use models. Be very
wary of those who try to intentionally make ideas more complex by using
--- PAGE 28 ---
big words for the sake of using big words. Concepts have to be simple to
be practical and usable.
 
7. You can love an idea, but don’t be married to it
Getting married to an idea or concept limits objective or creative
thinking. When you tie an idea to yourself, it becomes bigger than it
should be and this creates a situation where if for some reason your idea
turns out to be incorrect, you hold onto the sinking ship for much longer
than you normally would. Remember, the key is in making our runners
fast or advancing our knowledge of the science, not in stroking our ego.
Don’t create a situation where you are not free to admit past mistakes if
there is a better method. When we “fall in love” with an idea, we
essentially make it our belief system. So we tie our self-worth to the idea
instead of the final outcome.
 
8. Training does not occur in isolation
Too often we take an isolationist approach, looking at only the
effects of a single workout or training during a single season. This is not
how it works in the real world. Keep in mind the surrounding runs and
non-workout factors that blend together to impact every single workout.
Similarly, too often we plan each season independently without
acknowledging what preceded it. What a runner has done in the past
impacts what the effects of the training he will do in the future are.
--- PAGE 29 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 31 ---
Section 1
--- PAGE 32 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 33 ---
The Science of Distance
Running
“Anybody can understand anything, as long as it is clearly explained,
but, more than that, if they are sufficiently interested.” Ben Goldacre
 
The sport of distance running has a long history that has been
closely tied to the rise of sports science. The founder of modern
physiology, Nobel Prize winner A.V. Hill, chose running as his platform to
develop the concept of oxygen consumption (Bassett & Howley, 2000).
Even with this long history of investigating the mechanisms behind
performance and ways to enhance it in sports science, many questions
remain unanswered and the exact factors that govern performance are still
debated. In addition, unlike other activities such as weightlifting, the
optimal way to train distance runners, including both the effects of
training at different intensities and how to periodize that training, remains
unknown. The current function of science in training is not to be used as a
way to prescribe training but instead as a way to explain why training used
by coaches or athletes works.
The purpose of this section is twofold. First, it is to establish the
variety of mechanisms that control and limit performance in the sport of
distance running. Second, it is to look at the current training methods used
by trained athletes and evaluate their impact on the physiological factors
that govern performance. By analyzing the factors that affect performance
and the current training trends, limitations in the training of competitive
distance runners will become apparent.
Additionally, a sub-goal is to bridge the gap between the Sports
Scientists of the world and the coaches. Both groups do outstanding work,
but it is as if a gap exists with each group going about their business with
an air of superiority while completely ignoring or dismissing the other
group. This has resulted in two completely different ways of training
endurance athletes, with the coaches prevailing up to this point in the
superiority of performance in my opinion. This strange battle should not
be against each other, but rather there should be cooperation aimed at
finding out how to optimize performance. Once egos are put aside and we
--- PAGE 34 ---
acknowledge that we do not have all the answers, then new performance
levels will be met.
This section is very dense with information. I do not hold back on
the latest ideas or concepts surrounding exercise science. This is not meant
to scare you away, but if you find it intimidating and are looking for how
to apply it to training, I would suggest reading Chapters 2 and 3 to get a
grasp on fatigue, and then skip to Section 2 of the book, which is on
training.
--- PAGE 35 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 37 ---
1    

--- PAGE 38 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 39 ---
How Running Happens
“Scientific testing can’t determine how the mind will tolerate pain in
a race. Sometimes, I say, ‘Today I can die.” Percy Cerutty
 
When broken down in its simplest form, running is nothing but a
series of connected spring-like hops or bounds. A certain amount of
energy needs to be imparted into the ground to propel the runner forward,
continuing the running movement. The amount of energy needed depends
on the pace that the athlete is running; as the pace increases a greater
amount of energy is needed. This energy comes about through two
primary mechanisms called active and passive mechanics. Active
mechanics refers to what we all think about when it comes to what drives
running, actively recruiting muscles that generate force via muscle
contraction. On the other hand, passive mechanics are a result of the body,
namely the muscles, tendons, and ligaments, acting in a spring-like
manner, temporarily storing the energy that comes about from the collision
of the foot with the ground. During the subsequent push off or propulsion
phase of running, this energy is utilized and released contributing to
forward propulsion. These two mechanisms combine to provide the
necessary force and energy to power the running movement.
 In simplistic terms, a runner can keep going at the same pace as long
as they can produce the necessary kinetic energy, whether this comes from
force production or passive mechanical energy. Once they cannot impart
enough energy, the pace has to slow, as they are not able to cover the same
amount of ground with the same stride rate. Simply stated, they fatigue.
Before looking at performance and fatigue, it’s important to grasp the
intricacies of the running movement. While the previous description
provides the framework, let’s delve into each step of how running actually
occurs from the Central Nervous System all the way down to a single
muscle contraction. Once this has been done, the potential limiters along
the route can be identified.
 
Motor Programming
--- PAGE 40 ---
The brain, or to be more exact the Central Nervous System (CNS),
is where movement starts. The simple act of moving one finger is an
incredibly complex task involving multiple systems; so completely
understanding a complex dynamic movement like running is a daunting
task. What we do know is that movement originates in the nervous system.
The nervous system consists of higher levels of organization, such as the
brain itself, and lower levels, such as the spinal cord and brainstem. These
two levels of the nervous system combine to decide how movement takes
place.
Movement occurs with a combination of pre-conceived motor
programs and slight tweaks or alterations based on sensory information.
Essentially, the body has a gross general plan of how to go about doing a
certain movement and then tweaks that plan based on the sensory
information it is constantly receiving. The movement pattern serves as the
rough basis for how that particular movement should take place. The
sensory information provides for the on the go adjustment like that seen
when running on a road versus sand or when an unexpected root pops up
in front of you. If the body simply worked by pre-determined motor
programming without the ability to use feed forward or feedback
information to adjust, we’d all be in trouble.
On the higher level, the brain works in an integrated way in that
several areas of the brain combine to work dynamically to create the
running pattern, using feedback and feed forward information to provide
the details on what the muscles should do. At the lower spinal cord level,
movements that occur reflexively or without the need for sensory
feedback or feed forward information are developed. At the spinal cord
level, Central Pattern Generator’s (CPG) guide movement patterns and
muscle activity without the need for sensory input (Molinari, 2009). These
two processes integrate using both active and passive mechanics to decide
how movement ultimately takes place.
In establishing the movement pattern, what muscles to activate, how
often to activate them, and in what order activation takes place are all
determined. While running, the CNS uses a complex amount of sensory
information including, external stimuli such as the ground surface, limb
movement and position such as how the foot is striking, and internal
stimuli such as the length of various muscles throughout the movement or
--- PAGE 41 ---
even the buildup of fatiguing products in the muscles themselves. All of
this information, combined with the basic motor programming, results in
an on the fly adjustment of how you are moving. A variety of adjustments
are made including, what type of motor units (groups of muscle fibers) are
recruited, the recruitment pattern, how long of a rest to work cycle a motor
unit has, the relaxation of opposing muscles, and the manipulation of non-
propulsive fibers to minimize the effect the impact with the ground has.
The CNS is constantly using all of the sensory information, comparing the
intended movement with the actual movement, and making slight tweaks
or adjustments. Not only does it make adjustments based on the movement
but also on what to alter when fatigue is building up. While this will be
covered in depth in the next chapter, how the body deals with fatigue is
ultimately a motor control issue. Have you ever wondered why you might
start leaning back, swing your arms wildly, or reach out with your foot
during the end of an exhausting race? This happens because of a
combination of conscious and subconscious control in which you are
trying to compensate for fatigue by a variety of biomechanical
adjustments. Part of training is teaching the body how to accurately adjust
the movement pattern to fatigue. From a motor programming standpoint,
doing all out workouts where form is broken down completely might lead
to negative motor programming, or in layman’s terms, bad habits.
At first, the movement pattern is rough, uncoordinated and
inefficient, but as a person becomes better trained, this process is refined
and improved. Initially, the exact recruitment pattern or how to relax the
opposing muscle is not known or refined. Slowly, the body becomes more
efficient at determining exactly what muscles need to be working and for
how long. This refinement results in a smoothing out of the movement and
is an improvement in neuromuscular control, which creates an efficient
movement pattern that enhances performance via improving efficiency.
This process is called motor learning, and contrary to popular belief,
running is a skill that needs to be learned and refined.
While previously it had been thought that improvement in motor
learning only occurred at the higher levels such as in the motor cortex in
the brain, recent evidence has demonstrated that even at the spinal cord
level the movement pattern can be refined (Molinari, 2009). The movement
pattern is generally improved by better coordination of activating just the
--- PAGE 42 ---
right amount of motor units to do the work, improving the cycling of motor
unit activation, and decreasing the level of co-activation (when the
opposing muscle is active at the same time as the main muscle).
Additionally, as a movement becomes well refined, it is believed that the
CNS becomes better at using all of the sensory information that is
receiving, essentially weeding out the pertinent from the inconsequential
information better than when first learning how to move.
 
 
Sending and Receiving the Signal
The actual process of activating muscles occurs because of
communication between the brain and the muscles. After all, we have to
figure out how to get the message across a continual chain of linked nerve
cells. Neural signals called action potentials act as the communication
device as signals make their way from the brain through the spinal cord
and eventually to the muscles themselves. An action potential works via
differences between the electrical charge inside the cell and outside the
cell. A cell has a resting voltage called the resting membrane potential. In
its resting state, a cell is polarized in that inside the cell has a negative
charge compared to the outside of the cell, which basically means that
there is a greater concentration of negative ions inside the cell.
An action potential occurs when this charge is reversed, or
depolarized, to a significant enough degree so that now the inside of the
cell has a positive charge (Brooks & Fahey, 2004). It’s this shift in balance
from a negative to a positive charge that allows the action potential to take
place. Therefore to initiate or continue this “signal,” a significant enough
stimulus needs to be received to change from a negative to a positive
electrical balance inside the cell. Once the action potential is generated,
repolarization occurs, returning the membrane potential to resting levels so
--- PAGE 43 ---
that it can be potentially activated again. The action potential that was
formed now flows down the cell and communicates to the next cell in line
via neurotransmitters. If the next cell is significantly stimulated, then this
process occurs over and over as the signal makes its way from its origin
through the nervous system and down to the muscles. This chain reaction
can be thought of as a continual exchange of the baton from one runner to
the next to get the baton to the finish line or, in the body’s case, the muscle.
The electrical charge inside and outside of the cell is altered mainly
by differences in sodium and potassium inside and outside of the cell. The
potassium maintains the negative internal charge while the sodium keeps
the positive external charge. To get the aforementioned action potential to
occur, we need some way to change the ratio of potassium and sodium
inside the cell. To accomplish this we have a device in the cell called the
Sodium-Potassium pump, as well as changes in ease of movement through
the cell membrane for potassium (Brooks & Fahey, 2004). When sodium
gates are opened we get a shift in electrical charge in the cell, which can
cause depolarization.
But what is the key to unlock and open the sodium gates? In motor
units, it is caused by the neurotransmitter Acetylcholine (ACh).
Neurotransmitters are simply chemicals that allow for communication
between cells. Following the action potential creation, the potassium gates
open causing potassium to exit the cell, which causes repolarization thus
returning the cell to normal. What we are left with then is a neural signal
traveling towards the muscle via a linked system of neurons. We need ACh
to signal to the cell to open the doors so that we can shift the change in
charge of the cell. Once this occurs, the signal (action potential) is allowed
to travel to the next neuron until it finally reaches the muscle. As we
become better trained, all of this signaling can improve. We can see
changes in the excitability of the neuron or in how quickly the signal
travels. It’s almost like we build bigger, better highways with a higher
speed limit the more we drive along the neural pathway.
 
Muscle Contraction
The nerve signal eventually reaches the neuron that connects with the
group of muscle fibers we are trying to reach, called an α motor neuron.
--- PAGE 44 ---
The entire α motor neuron and connected muscle fibers make up what is
called a motor unit. The action potential travels down the neuron until it
reaches the gap between the neuron and the actual muscle fiber, called the
neuromuscular junction. This junction is where communication between
the neuron and the muscle takes place. As previously mentioned, this
occurs via the releasing of neurotransmitters (in this case ACh) that travel
across a small gap between the neuron and the muscle and bind to special
receptors on the muscle. The binding of the neurotransmitter causes an
action potential to occur in the muscle cell, which can lead to the
depolarization process described previously. If enough action potentials
reach the muscle cell, then it crosses a depolarization threshold and the
muscle will fire.
In the muscle cell, the depolarization process that leads to
contraction is a little more complicated. Depolarization causes Calcium
that is stored in a structure called the sarcoplasmic reticulum to be released.
The Calcium quickly spreads throughout the muscle fiber with the goal of
eventually reaching the actual contractile parts of the fiber. Deep within the
cell is its basic unit the myofibril, which contains the two main contractile
filaments, actin and myosin. Actin is referred to as the thin filament while
myosin is referred to as the thick filament because it has myosin heads on
it, which can attach to the actin. The way contraction works is that these
heads on the myosin essentially latch onto the actin filament and yank it,
then detach and pull it some more until the muscle is contracted.
At rest, the myosin heads cannot attach to the actin because the
attachment site is blocked. However, the calcium released frees up the
attachment site and allows the myosin head to attach to the actin. When it
does this, it essentially pulls on the actin, causing contraction. The repeated
pulling and releasing that goes on is what causes muscle contraction.
Without calcium release, this interaction cannot occur. To help
conceptualize this process, think of a stationary person (the myosin)
pulling on a rope (the actin) to try to drag a heavy object towards them.
The person’s hand represent the myosin head as they grab the rope, pull it
some, let go, and then grab it again to pull the object closer.
But that’s not the entire story. This whole contraction process
requires energy. Energy in the form of ATP is required so that the myosin
head can pull on the actin. This movement requires the release of energy.
--- PAGE 45 ---
However, in terms of supplying energy, ATP needs to be supplied once the
myosin head has completed its pull to allow for it to release and be ready
for the next pulling cycle. Thus, the process of supplying energy is one of
replenishment. Without the resupplying of ATP after the myosin head’s
pulling has occurred, the continual process of attaching, dragging, and
releasing cannot occur. In our conceptualization, without energy, the actual
pulling of the rope takes energy, but if we did not supply energy at the end
of a single pull, then our person would not be able to move his hands
further up the rope and pull again. This is the process of a single
contraction of a muscle fiber. Once the contraction occurs, relaxation has to
occur before a subsequent contraction occurs. Relaxation is dependent on
the calcium being transported back into its holding site, the sarcoplasmic
reticulum. Until the calcium returns, another contraction cannot occur.
 
 
 
Energy Needed
As you can see from the process of contraction, chemical energy
needs to be generated in the form of ATP to resupply the myosin heads
during the contraction process. We only have a limited amount of stored
ATP in the muscle, so we have several processes to recycle ATP. Our body
acts as a recycling plant. These processes are a series of chemical reactions
that take the various products left over from the energy release that occurs
when contraction takes place and recycles them into ATP. When the
myosin head uses energy, the ATP, which consists of an Adenosine
molecule and three Phosphates (Pi), is broken down to ADP (Adenosine +
2 Pi) and a separate Pi. The separation of one of the Pi causes energy
release. In the end, we are left with ADP and Pi floating around, or in some
cases AMP (Adenosine + 1 Pi) and Pi. The energy systems work to use
these and other building blocks to recreate ATP so that it can then be
separated again to release more energy.
We have several energy systems that all use a series of chemical
reactions to produce ATP. With each chemical reaction, enzymes are
required to convert the initial products into the final products. Enzymes
accomplish this by speeding up the rate of the reaction. Therefore the
--- PAGE 46 ---
quantity of certain enzymes is a trainable factor that can enhance
performance, as the ability to perform certain essential chemical reactions
is improved.
Each energy system differs in complexity in terms of how many
reactions are needed to finally get to ATP and on what the initial fuel
source is. Obviously, with a greater number of reactions, it takes longer to
go through the entire process. Additionally, there are more steps involved,
which means more chances of slow down and more substances needed for
each reaction. On the other hand, the supply of the products used during
the energy systems matters. With our simple, one or two-step reaction
systems they can produce ATP very quickly, but the fuel supply is limited
and thus used quickly. The complex multi-reaction systems have fuel
supplies that are much larger which means while they cannot produce ATP
as quickly, they can do so for a much longer time. Lastly, one other
difference is in the by-products that are produced. Each system results in
additional products besides ATP. Some of these products can interfere with
energy production or muscle contraction, and function in signaling to the
CNS that the body is out of homeostasis. Thus it is a balancing act between
by-product build up, the speed and power of the system, and the endurance
of the system. Let’s look at some specific details for each system.
The first system is actually several different small systems that are
termed the immediate energy systems. The quickest and easiest immediate
energy source is stored ATP; the muscle simply uses stored ATP as a quick
and easy energy source. The problem is that the amount of stored ATP in a
muscle is extremely low, enough to power contraction for only a second or
two (Brooks & Fahey, 2004). The next immediate system is what is
referred to as the Phosphagen system. It consists of the simple one-step
reaction of Creatine Phosphate (CP) and ADP, which yields ATP and
Creatine. Once again, the supply of CP in the muscle limits the use of this
highly powerful system to only 5-6 seconds of work (Brooks & Fahey,
2004). Lastly, the myokinase system takes two ADPs and creates one ATP
and one AMP. Even when all of these systems are combined, they can only
provide energy for muscle contraction for 5-15 seconds, far too short for
any endurance event (Brooks & Fahey, 2004). Besides the short capacity of
these systems, they also take a long time to recover. These immediate
systems essentially act as borrowing systems and cannot be repaid unless
--- PAGE 47 ---
intensity is low enough. For example, after total exhaustion of its
resources, the Phosphagen system requires the aerobic system to turn
Creatine back into CP so that it can be used again. At rest, this takes up to
several minutes.
To supplement the immediate energy systems, Glycolysis, which is
sometimes referred to as the anaerobic system, takes part of the workload.
Glycolysis is a system that requires no oxygen and has intermediate speed,
power, and capacity. Essentially, it is the middle distance runner of the
energy systems. Glycolysis works by the breakdown of glucose or stored
carbohydrate, glycogen. The breakdown of glycogen requires an extra step
and is called Glycogenolysis. Unlike the immediate energy systems,
Glycolysis involves 12 sequential chemical reactions that take us from
Glucose to Pyruvate. From here there is a fork in the road where pyruvate
can either be converted to lactate or to acetyl-CoA. The conversion to
acetyl-CoA allows for that substance to enter the mitochondria and be used
by the aerobic energy system. Contrary to popular belief, the decision on
which way the system goes at this point is not based on whether oxygen is
present or not (Brooks & Fahey, 2004). Instead, the quantity of enzymes
that convert it to lactate or acetyl-CoA and whether or not there is
sufficient mitochondrial activity to handle pyruvate and other products
produced by glycolysis (namely NADH) are the major determining factors
on which way Glycolysis goes. Thus mitochondria, which will be
discussed shortly, are important in determining the end route of Glycolysis.
More on this process and the conversion to lactate will be covered in
subsequent chapters.
One major drawback to Glycolysis, especially when it goes the
lactate route, is that by-products are produced which can interfere with the
energy systems, contraction itself, or even serve as a signaling mechanism
to the brain that fatigue is imminent. While lactate itself does not cause
fatigue, certain accompanying products, namely Hydrogen ions (H+), have
been shown to contribute to fatigue. Lactate is, in fact, a fuel source that
can be used aerobically. In the next chapter, the buildup of these products
will be discussed. While the buildup of fatiguing products is one downside
to Glycolysis, the amount of energy produced is another downside. With
each cycle through Glycolysis, 2 total ATP are produced, which is far less
than the amount produced aerobically. Glycolysis is thus an intermediate
--- PAGE 48 ---
system that delivers a moderate amount of ATP fairly quickly but with
some negative consequences.
The last energy system is commonly referred to as the Aerobic
system. You may notice that I am not terming it Aerobic Glycolysis. This is
because Glycolysis is a process by itself that does not require oxygen. You
have to go through Glycolysis to get the necessary products to proceed
with aerobic energy breakdown, but it is confusing to think of aerobic and
anaerobic Glycolysis because in reality there is one Glycolysis, the last
step just differs. As mentioned previously, pyruvate is converted to acetyl-
CoA, which then has to be transported into the mitochondria for use. The
mitochondria are a different organelle and are commonly referred to as the
powerhouse of the muscle cell. Once inside the mitochondria, the acetyl-
CoA enters what is called the Krebs cycle. The Krebs cycle is the first step
of the aerobic system. It consists of a series of 10 chemical reactions that
function to produce an ATP source and a series of products that can be used
in the second step of the aerobic system. The important products are
NADH and FADH.
From here, these products enter the second step of the aerobic
system, the electron transport chain. The Electron Transport Chain consists
of a series of reactions that basically take the NADH (or FADH) and
another H+ ion and react it with Oxygen, creating ATP, NAD, and water.
While the process is more complex than this, the important thing to
remember is that it is only this last step in which Oxygen is required. As
can be seen, the aerobic system requires a large number of steps and
transport of products to and from a different part of the muscle cell than
where contraction is actively taking place. Due to these factors, the aerobic
system produces a large amount of ATP (~30 in total) but is more time-
consuming. An advantage of this is that the subsequent by-products are
kept to a minimum. Thus the aerobic system has a large fuel supply, causes
little by-product fatigue, but takes longer to produce energy.
While the above steps have dealt with using Glycolysis and thus
carbohydrate to produce acetyl-CoA, fat and protein can also be broken
down to acetyl-CoA, which can enter the Krebs cycle and produce aerobic
energy. The problem with Fat is that it is an even more complex chemical
process than carbohydrate breakdown, thus while the energy production is
very high, it can only work at low to moderate intensities. Once a runner
--- PAGE 49 ---
gets much beyond around half marathon pace, the fat usage is very
minimal. With protein, there is no natural storage of protein, unlike fat or
carbohydrate. Thus when using protein as a fuel source, proteins that are
meant for another use are being consumed. An example would be the
breakdown and use of muscle protein.
Lastly, let’s look at how the energy systems work. As already
mentioned, the energy systems are not mutually exclusive but interact with
each other. To conceptualize how they interact, let’s go through starting an
exercise or a race. It’s best to think of all the energy systems being started
up at the very start of exercise; it just takes some longer to rev up and reach
full capacity. The amount of contribution is dependent on the intensity, or
energy required. The systems dynamically combine to provide the total
amount of energy that is required with the exact contribution changing
throughout. What we are left with then are the combination of systems
trying to fill the energy demands. In the distance events, I like to think of it
as the immediate and anaerobic energy systems being the gap fillers.
At lower or moderate intensities, the full immediate energy store is
not used up as the energy requirement is low and Glycolysis quickly steps
in. Glycolysis takes around 20-30sec to reach maximum capacity, while the
Aerobic system takes around 90sec- 2min to reach maximum capacity
(Duffield et al., 2005). In looking at a race, in terms of the dominant energy
system, the crossover point where aerobic energy is the majority supplied
occurs at around 45sec (Hill, 1999). For this reason, if we look at relative
energy system contribution for different races, anything over 400m uses
the aerobic system to supply the majority of its energy. For competitive
males a variety of studies have found that the energy contribution between
aerobic and anaerobic systems is 60% aerobic and 40% anaerobic for the
800m, 77%/23% for the 1,500m, and 86%/14% for the 3,000m races (Hill,
1999, Duffield et al., 2005).
The timing of the energy systems reaching capacity is not the only
issue. The amount of energy required also plays a role. The aerobic system
is limited in its total energy supply rate capacity. Therefore if the exercise
is at an intensity that is higher than the maximum rate of energy production
for the aerobic system, Glycolysis has to step in and cover the energy
requirement gap that is present. This results in the ever-accumulating by-
products that can eventually lead to fatigue. For this reason, increasing the
--- PAGE 50 ---
capacity of the aerobic system to produce energy is a beneficial training
adaptation to delay fatigue. If the gap between aerobic energy production
and needed supply can be shrunk, that means less Glycolytic energy is
needed to fill that gap and less by-product accumulation.
As you can see, contrary to popular belief, you do not get more
“anaerobic” during a race but actually rely increasingly on aerobic means.
This is a confusing issue for some, as they’ve been taught that lactate
accumulation from going anaerobic causes fatigue. While lactate does not
cause fatigue, the other by-products that can cause fatigue increase in
accumulation at shorter high-intensity races toward the end of the race. It
isn’t that they are being produced at a higher rate; it is just that the ability
to use or clear these items is increasingly diminished. Additionally, some of
these products cause a reduction in the ability to produce energy through
Glycolysis, and as that system begins to “falter” and the aerobic system is
maxed out, something has to give because the energy needed cannot be
supplied. The thing that gives is the pace, as a slowing of the pace
decreases the energy demand. More on the actual causes of fatigue are
discussed in the following chapter.
 
Muscle Fiber Types
Having gone from the brain down to the microscopic organelles in
the muscles themselves, let’s look at the different kinds of muscle fibers
we have. Fiber types are generally classified as Slow Twitch (ST) or Fast
Twitch (FT) with several subdivisions of FT fiber types depending on the
classification method (FT-a,x,c are common classifications). The main
method for classifying fibers is based on what type of a protein called
myosin the fiber predominately has. The problem is that each muscle fiber
type does not contain only one kind of myosin form, but instead most
have a mixing of a variety of fast and slow forms. Therefore, it is not a
distinct division in fiber types, like most believe.  As was stated in Brooks,
Fahey, and Baldwin’s seminal text on Physiology, “considering the
number of possible combinations of MHCs (myosin heavy chain) and
myosin light chains, there are innumerable fiber types (pg. 412).”
While scientists like to break things down into a nice distinct fiber
type classification system, the reality is that fiber types are more like a
--- PAGE 51 ---
spectrum. On one side of the spectrum we have what we’d call a pure ST
fiber and on the opposite is the pure FT fiber. In between these two
extremes is a range of fibers with different ratios of FT/ST characteristics,
and this is where the majority of fibers fall. Where exactly a fiber falls
depends on its individual characteristics, which include mitochondria
density, capillary density, oxidative and Glycolytic enzyme activity,
creatine phosphate stores, and contraction velocity.
Along this continuum, training can shift fiber types to either the
aerobic (ST) or anaerobic (FT) side. With acute training, the shifts are
very small, but with long-term training, a larger change can occur. How
large a change is up for debate. For a long time, Scientists thought that we
could not change fiber types at all. Once this was disproved, they thought
that distinct conversion from FT to ST couldn’t occur. The reality is that
we most likely can change fiber types, but it can’t be proven in humans
because it is a long process. Several pieces of evidence lead to this
conclusion.
First, animal studies on both rats and rabbits have demonstrated
complete fiber type changes with chronic muscle stimulation. What
researchers found is that a large amount of damage is required for a
complete transformation (Pette & Vrbova, 1999). For example, in rabbits,
a complete transformation from FT to ST occurs with chronic muscle
stimulation only if the researcher goes in and creates lesions in the muscle
fiber. In rats, the FT to ST conversion occurs but takes a large amount of
chronic stimulation causing considerable muscle damage. What these
animal studies demonstrate is that a complete conversion probably can
occur, it just takes a lot of damage, or in other words a long period of time
of training.
--- PAGE 52 ---
Second, fiber type percentages have been altered in elite skiers as
shown when they were tested during their beginning stages of training and
then 8 years later. A longitudinal study by Rusko found that after 8 years
of training and a doubling of training volume, the percentage of ST fibers
in a group of Cross-Country Skiers increased by 11% (1992). Put these
two together and it makes sense that a large amount of volume (or in other
words, damage) is needed to change fiber types.
This could partially explain why runners tend to reach peak
performance levels later than sprint or power type athletes. It could be
because distance runners need large amounts of training, or damage, to
complete this muscle fiber type conversion. Additionally, this fiber
conversion could also partially explain the success of African distance
runners. Perhaps there large volumes of unofficial training early on, such
as running to school or even the active lifestyle that they live allows for
this conversion to take place at a younger age. Africans tend to reach peak
performance at younger ages than their Western counterparts and this
could partially explain that phenomenon.
 
A Recruitment Issue
How muscle recruitment takes place is another important piece of
the puzzle. As discussed earlier, each muscle has a number of motor units,
which contain a large amount of individual muscle fibers. These motor
units are what gets signaled to contract and when this occurs all of the
muscle fibers in the unit contract. An entire muscle will never activate all
the motor units it contains. If this occurred, catastrophic damage to the
bone and surrounding tissue could occur. Thus the brain always keeps
some motor units in reserve, even during maximal contractions. This
reserve can be thought of as the body’s safety system. We have all heard
stories of people lifting boulders or mom’s lifting cars to save a child. It is
believed that in these rare occasions full activation of the muscles occurs.
It’s likely that the brain does a kind of cost-benefit analysis and decides
that using the full reserve and risking muscle or tissue damage is better
than the alternative, death. The interesting thing is that trained athletes can
use a larger percentage of their maximum recruitable fibers than the
untrained. Essentially, the well-trained person slowly convinces the body
--- PAGE 53 ---
that it’s okay if it activates a little more muscle. But how does the body
decide how many and what type of motor units are used?
First, muscle recruitment is dependent not on speed or intensity,
although they are related, but on force output required. The amount of
force needed is what predominately determines muscle activation. If more
force is required, the brain activates a larger amount of the muscle fiber
pool. This explains why running slightly slower up a hill activates more
muscle than running on the flat ground at a slightly faster pace. But it’s
just not about how much muscle is recruited but what type and in what
way.
What type of fibers are recruited has always been thought to work
based on Henneman’s size principle, which states that the easier to recruit
fibers (ST) take up the work first while the harder to recruit fibers are
activated as force or duration increases. But this isn’t always the case.
There are instances when FT fibers are recruited before ST fibers,
particularly in situations when a high amount of force is needed in a short
amount of time, such as ballistics exercises or during sprinting. Similarly,
the force rule of muscle fiber recruitment can be violated during
prolonged activity when ST fibers fatigue (glycogen is depleted for
example) and then the FT fibers are recruited to take up the slack, despite
the relatively low intensity and force recruitment.
Finally, the way recruitment occurs is important. Muscle fiber or
more properly termed Motor Unit, recruitment for endurance events
occurs in a cyclical manner. That means within a whole muscle, some
units are recruited to do the work and then they can cycle off and recover
while other units cycle on and take up the workload. At low intensities, the
number of units active at the same time is very low, but as intensity
increases more units need to be active at the same time to result in a great
enough force output, thus fewer units are recovering or inactive.
Additionally, as recruitment increases the “resting” time between both
when a fiber is recruited and between individual contractions of that fiber
decreases. Understanding the muscle fiber type spectrum and the ways in
which muscles are recruited will be important in designing training to
combat fatigue and individualize training.
 
--- PAGE 54 ---
Passive Mechanics
Up until now, the focus has been on active mechanics, in that active
muscle contraction initiated by the brain is supplying the force for
movement. Traditionally this has been considered the main contributor to
forward movement. The problem is that due to the short ground contact
time and then the even shorter amount of time in which the body is in
position to actually push and contribute to propulsion another energy
source is needed. This is where passive mechanics come in. Passive
mechanics can be separated into elastic energy storage, reflexes, and
passive mechanical principles.
When a runner’s foot collides with the ground, energy is absorbed
from the impact. That energy can either be recycled, utilized, or dissipated.
Instead of wasting the energy, the body has a remarkable system that
allows for us to reuse the energy in a similar way to a spring. In this case,
the muscles and tendons function as the spring, compressing and storing
energy when ground contact is made and subsequently rebounding and
releasing it upon push off. This spring-like mechanism provides a large
amount of the energy required for forward propulsion. The key is putting
the body in proper position to get the most elastic energy return with the
least amount of energy dissipation. This is one reason why running
mechanics should be optimally developed. This concept will be developed
further in the chapter on Efficiency.
Two similar concepts that rely on energy storage and return called
the stretch reflex and the stretch shortening cycle (SSC) also help
contribute to forward propulsion. The SSC basically refers to energy
storage and release in the muscle themselves. It occurs when a muscle is
actively stretched and then immediately contracts. During the pre-stretch
portion, energy is stored in the elastic components of the muscle and then
the energy is released during the contraction part. Essentially it is a spring-
like mechanism with storage and release of energy greater than if just
contraction took place. The amount of elastic energy return is dependent
on several factors including the length and speed of the stretch, the
stiffness of the muscle, and the time between the stretch and the
subsequent contraction (Saunders et al., 2004).  The most obvious
--- PAGE 55 ---
example is the calf during hopping or running; upon landing the calf is
stretched and then quickly contracts upon push off.
The stretch reflex is a similar phenomenon that occurs because of
sensory receptors in the muscle called Muscle Spindles. The spindles
detect changes in the length of a muscle. When a muscle is rapidly
stretched, the spindle basically sends a signal for the muscle to contract.
This is done to maintain a relatively constant muscle length. It’s common
to experience this phenomenon during a High School or College class or
when tired on an airplane. You may start to nod off slightly and then your
head dips forward until you reflexively jerk it back up. In this case, the
muscles on the back of the neck were rapidly stretched and thus the signal
was sent to contract them, jerking the head back upwards and startling
yourself and those around you.
One of the most overlooked contributions to human movement is
how the lower legs function from a purely mechanical viewpoint. The leg
can be thought of as multiple segments connected via simple joints. Taking
the muscles out of it, these limb segments will function based on purely
mechanical principles. This means that Physics and in particular Newton’s
laws of motions help dictate how the legs will move.
On this front, interesting research by Tad McGeer has demonstrated
the passive dynamic properties of the lower legs. He built robots that were
essentially just the lower leg segments of the body, and without an engine,
the robots can walk in a human-like fashion as long as a single initial force
is applied. Once the single initial force is applied, or if the robot is on a
slight downhill, the machine will walk in human-like fashion without any
assistance. These robots are a great demonstration of the passive dynamic
properties of the lower limbs. Just like in human walking, due to the
physics of the two joint system, the lower leg will fold up slightly on the
recovery phase allowing for it to clear the ground and land in front of the
body.
The translation to running should be obvious. We tend to think of the
entire running cycle happening because of active mechanics, but the reality
is that simple mechanical principles dictate much of our movement. When
walking, for example, there is no need to contract the hamstring to a large
degree to bring the lower leg up slightly towards the butt during the
recovery phase. Similarly during running, if the push off and hip extension
--- PAGE 56 ---
is large, the lower leg will fold up automatically and does not need to be
pulled up with the hamstring. If the runner chooses to pull with his
hamstring, then he’s just wasting energy.
The combination of both passive and active dynamics helps create
movement. In looking at running performance or the biomechanics of
running, it is easy to focus on only one particular part of the picture. When
discussing how to improve performance the conversation inevitably
focuses on active muscle contraction, without giving any regards to the
contribution of passive dynamics to performance. Similarly, when looking
at how a person should run, often the stretch reflex or passive dynamics are
not considered. Keep this in mind as we delve further into what limits
running performance. Now that we know how running happens, let’s look
at why we fatigue or tire during running.
 
--- PAGE 57 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 59 ---
2

--- PAGE 60 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 61 ---
Fatigue: Friend or Foe?
“The winner is the athlete for whom defeat is the least acceptable
rationalization.” Tim Noakes
 
What limits performance? That is the central question that a coach,
athlete, and sports scientist all want to answer, and the answer is fatigue.
Fatigue is a nebulous catch-all term that basically means we slow down or
performance decreases. While we have a good idea of what causes fatigue
under a variety of isolated situations, the exact mechanisms behind fatigue
in a dynamic activity such as running are only now becoming clear. There
are an old model and a new model of fatigue. The older model of fatigue
was developed based on isolating fatigue. Originally, research focused on
simple exercises such as handgrip or a simple bicep curl; then, when
research progressed to dynamic exercises such as running or cycling, it
was done in an unnatural way (run at X pace until you can’t, instead of a
self-paced trial). These two methodology quirks shaped our understanding
of fatigue throughout the 20th century.
Understanding where fatigue comes from and how it develops is
crucial for the coach and scientist. The name of the game is limiting
fatigue so that we can race longer or faster. By knowing how it occurs, a
coach can plan training to adapt the body to resist fatigue. A coach can
then use this knowledge of fatigue to create workouts based on fatigue
models, which is covered in the training section of the book.
 
How Fatigue Manifests Itself
The obvious consequence of fatigue is that you slow down. Why do
we slow? The simple reason is that it is a way for our body to protect us.
We slow because we are well beyond homeostasis that nice natural
equilibrium the body likes, and if we go much more beyond that
homeostasis then dangerous consequences could occur. Fatigue is thus a
protective mechanism.
We don’t need science to tell us that we slow down, so what actually
happens? When broken down, running is a series of spring-like hops. A
certain amount of force needs to be imparted into the ground to propel the
--- PAGE 62 ---
runner forward. The amount of force needed depends on the pace that the
athlete is running; the faster the pace, the more force is needed. This force
comes about mainly through the muscles themselves generating force via
muscle contraction. In simplistic terms, a runner can keep going at the
same pace as long as they can produce the force necessary on the ground.
Once they cannot impart enough force, the pace has to slow as they are not
able to cover the same amount of ground with the same stride rate. But
what causes a drop in force? Muscle fatigue.
If we look at the biomechanical changes that occur over a 5k race,
we get a clear picture of the effects of fatigue. Gerard (2013) and
colleagues tracked changes in running mechanics as well as ground
reaction forces over the course of a 5k track race. Not surprisingly, the
main findings were that peak vertical forces declined throughout the race,
ground contact time lengthened, and stride rate and length decreased while
the runner slowed. We can’t put in as much force as quickly as we get
tired, so we slow and our mechanics change. What is happening on a
musculature level to cause these changes?
First, when we look at total force output, we can look at it from both
a single muscle contraction and an integrated multiple motor unit points of
view. So when we look at total force production changes, we are looking
at everything along the path from the brain sending the signal, all the way
down to the muscle contracting itself. Fatigue can occur along many of the
steps of the process, although much attention is focused on supplying
energy for the actual contraction to occur.
From the single contraction point of view, we can see that the last
portion of muscle contraction is important when discussing fatigue. Many
theorize that since the last step of muscle contraction is dependent on ATP
supply, energy supply is what limits performance. Or in other words, in
order to delay fatigue, the recycling of ATP must keep up with the demand
for ATP by the muscles. If supply cannot keep up with demand, then
fatigue occurs. As you all know, we have several different energy systems
to recycle ATP. This is where the energetic theory of fatigue comes into
play. If we cannot regenerate ATP at a sufficient rate, fatigue occurs. The
importance of the energy systems derives from these ideas.
While single muscle fiber contraction is how force is developed in
isolation, the reality is that total force develops through the integration of
--- PAGE 63 ---
many different motor units being active. Thus, the second factor that
determines force is how many motor units are recruited to do the work. As
previously mentioned, the Central Nervous System (CNS) sends the signal
to the muscle to initiate recruitment. Thus, the CNS is in charge of
deciding how many motor units need to be recruited to do the necessary
work. The CNS can regulate exact force production in several ways. First,
the type of motor units recruited and their individual characteristics play a
role. Muscle fiber types are typically broken down into several distinct
types, but it is best to think of them as a spectrum ranging from pure Fast
Twitch (FT) to pure Slow Twitch (ST). The more FT a fiber is the higher
force production from that fiber but the lower fatigue resistance. For this
reason, ST fibers are generally initially recruited while FT fibers are
reserved for later recruitment or very high force requirement activities like
sprinting.
Second, the total amount of motor units recruited influences force
production. A greater amount of motor units recruited means more muscle
fibers able to do the work. Obviously whether they are FT or ST fibers
also plays a role but in general, the more motor units that are recruited the
more force that can be developed.
Lastly, the way in which muscles are recruited plays a role. Muscle
recruitment can either happen synchronistically or asynchronistically. For
endurance events, recruitment general happens in an asynchronous fashion
in which we rotate the work among motor units as some contract while
others rest. Once the working units become fatigued, the resting units take
over the workload and let the fatigued one’s rest (Maglischo, 2003). In this
way, force output is kept constant. While these aren’t the only ways the
body regulates force output, for fatigue these are the main ones to
consider.
We can use an analogy to understand the process of force
development a little bit better. If you are in charge of a construction job,
you know exactly how much work you need to have your workers do
before the job is finished. Just as the brain uses resources efficiently, you
don’t want to hire more workers than you need and you want to hire the
right ones for the job. So what our fictional construction manager does is
decide based on the job how many to hire, just as the brain decides how
many fibers to recruit. The next step is to decide what type of worker, or in
--- PAGE 64 ---
our analogy muscle fibers, to hire. We can either hire fast workers who
only work a few hours a day before tiring or stronger slower workers.
Based on our construction job, we decide which ones will do the best job,
and then finally, we decide shift hours and whether we want everyone
working the same 8-hour shifts, or if we want to stagger them. Our brain,
just like our construction manager, makes all of these decisions in its best
interest to accomplish the job in the most efficient way possible.
One other factor plays a role in how much force output occurs and it
has to do with the biomechanics of the movement. There are certain
biomechanical phenomena that aid in force output. The use of elastic
energy is chief among them. The most well known is that of the Stretch
Shortening Cycle (SSC). The SSC occurs when a muscle is initially
stretched and then immediately contracts. When this occurs, the force
output is much higher than if the muscle had simply contracted from a
resting position. It essentially acts in the same way that a rubber band
would. Not only do the muscles use elastic energy but the tendons do too.
Another form of elastic energy storage and return occurs when ground
contact is made. Upon ground contact, a large amount of energy is
transmitted up the body that can be stored and used subsequently to push
off from the ground. In particular, the tendons are useful in this respect.
The two main contributors are the Achilles tendon and the arch of the foot
(Ker et al., 1987). While the details of these will be discussed later, it’s
important to understand that elastic energy storage and return plays a large
role in total force output. Additionally, this system can experience fatigue.
Muscle or tendon damage is one way that the storage and use of elastic
energy can decrease. Additionally, as we fatigue our ability to dissipate the
muscle vibration that occurs with every impact is affected. This means we
now have a decreased ability to utilize this so-called “free energy.” Now
that we understand the basics of force output, it’s time to move onto
fatigue.
 
How Fatigue Occurs
In the next chapter we will look at fatigue as a whole, but for this
section, I want to break it down into its individualized parts before putting
it back together. This is what the “old” model of fatigue does. We look at
--- PAGE 65 ---
items that may cause fatigue in the periphery. While this isn’t how newer
theories suggest it works, it provides a framework off of which to work.
The first is what I call the by-product buildup, the second is depletion, and
the third is regulation, which includes the Central governor theory.
 
The By-Product Buildup
The By-Product buildup idea states that it is the buildup of certain
by-products or substances that cause fatigue at several different levels.
The most common, although wrong, example of this theory is the buildup
of lactic acid. In essence, the buildup of certain products creates fatigue by
impairing force output at any number of the different steps to get from
muscle recruitment to contraction. Whether these products directly or
indirectly cause fatigue is another subject that will be covered shortly.
There are many different products that can potentially cause fatigue.
Many of the earlier ideas centered on the energetic model in which
supplying ATP to the muscle for contraction is the main component. As is
well known, the three basic energy systems are the immediate
(Phosphagen and Myokinase), Glycolysis, and Aerobic system. Each
system requires a series of chemical reactions that ultimately result in ATP
reformation. The belief is that the energy systems, mainly the Glycolytic
one, create by-products that inhibit subsequent energy production. As the
use of these systems increased, by-products that cause fatigue increased to
a degree that they interfered with total energy production from all the
systems. In the energetic model, the enzymes that catalyze the numerous
chemical reactions become less active, thus directly slowing energy
production.
Looking at it from a contraction standpoint, these by-product
increases can interfere with contraction via methods outside of energy
production. Any number of the steps to get from sending the signal to
actual muscle contraction can be impaired. The accumulation of such
products as ammonia and potassium are prime examples, as these alter
muscle fiber excitability. The impairment of muscle contraction can occur
at any number of different sites, ranging from impairing the action
potential to changes in Calcium release or uptake which can delay
contraction and relaxation (Hargreaves & Spriett, 2006).
--- PAGE 66 ---
While lactate was initially seen as the culprit, hydrogen ions (H+)
and the corresponding drop in pH are more compelling examples. As pH
drops, the rate of ATP replenishment drops due to a reduction of two
enzymes, PFK and ATPase, as well as an increase in the amount of
Calcium needed during muscle contraction (Maglischo, 2003). This is just
one example, and while it is beyond the scope of this book to review every
product and site of fatigue, some include increased levels of: H+,
ammonia, Potassium, Phosphate, Calcium, and ADP (Hargreaves &
Spriett, 2006).
 
 
Depletion
The idea of depletion is basically the exact opposite of the by-
product buildup idea. Instead of the accumulation of products that cause
fatigue, it is the depletion of products that lead to fatigue. It’s best to think
of this theory in terms of fuel sources. Whenever a vital fuel source is
running low, then fatigue is going to occur because the runner will need to
slow down and switch fuel sources to make sure that total depletion does
not occur.
Two prime examples of this are on the opposite ends of the energetic
spectrum. The first is with the immediate energy systems. As we run out
of stored ATP, we have to switch to get another energy system revved up
and going. If that didn’t occur, then we’d hit some sort of catastrophic
failure. We end up slowing slightly as our next fuel system up can’t
provide energy at the same rate. The other example is in that of glycogen
use. There is only a limited amount of glycogen stored in the body. When
that fuel source starts to run low, the body has to switch to less productive
fuel sources, such as fat, to keep going. This occurs during a marathon or
longer races. Thus the depletion of glycogen causes fatigue. Other
examples include a decrease in blood glucose or Branch Chain Amino
Acids (Hargreaves & Spriett, 2006). The reality is that fatigue is a
dynamic process and does not occur in isolation. Thus it depends on the
individual and the race that they are running. It is likely that it is a
combination of products that build up and other products that deplete
which cause fatigue.
--- PAGE 67 ---
 
Oxygen’s Role
 This basic understanding of how and why fatigue develops is critical
in understanding the development of the scientific models of endurance
performance, and in figuring out what limits performance. Using the
concepts expressed above, to prevent fatigue we must reduce the rate of
by-product buildup or fuel source depletion, or alternatively increase the
level of buildup or depletion that we can withstand before we consciously
or subconsciously start reducing performance.
Exercise science has been based on the energetic model, which states
that it is energy supply that is important in delaying fatigue due to the fact
that contraction is dependent on having energy. As explained in Chapter 1,
energy is recycled via three main energy systems: the immediate systems,
Glycolysis, and the Aerobic system. Each has their benefits and
drawbacks, but the common understanding is that the immediate system
and Glycolysis lead to some negative drawbacks like by-products.
One key concept to understand with energy systems is that they don’t
work independently. As soon as hard exercise starts they are all on, it just
takes longer for some to rev up to full capacity and take their workload.
Thus the immediate systems and then Glycolysis carry the early load
during the start of the race until the aerobic system gets revved up in
distance races. Research has demonstrated that this crossover point where
the aerobic system becomes predominant is usually around 90 seconds
(Spencer & Gastin, 2001). Thus, contrary to what popular literature states,
in middle and distance events, we get more energy aerobically as the race
progresses. Due to the predominance of the aerobic system in middle and
long distance events and the fact that it does not build up by-products that
can lead to fatigue at the same rate as the other systems, oxygen has been
given central importance in running performance. Oxygen allows the
Aerobic system to function and do its job. Without the oxygen taken in,
delivered, and utilized we have to rely more on Glycolysis and suffer the
consequences of building up by-products. Therefore the supply and
utilization of oxygen so that the aerobic system can recycle energy are
crucial when it comes to fatigue.
 
--- PAGE 68 ---
Regulation
The last idea on fatigue is an integrated model, which we will touch
on, in the next chapter. The idea is espoused by Tim Noakes in his Central
Governor model and in other dynamic models such as Samuel Marcora’s.
The central idea of such models is that fatigue is not directly caused by
any such buildup or depletion of certain products. Instead, those products
serve as feedback for either a conscious or subconscious controlling
mechanism.
Whatever the controlling mechanism is, the point is that exercise is
not limited but rather regulated. The body uses the changes in homeostasis
of the various products to regulate fatigue. Depending on the model it
does this through regulation of muscle force output. Finally tying it back
to the force output mechanisms, remember back to the various methods of
regulating force output. Noakes’ CGM states that the body uses the
feedback it receives to regulate performance by controlling force output
via the various methods already mentioned, chiefly muscle recruitment. If
the by-products build up too quickly, muscle recruitment is decreased, and
thus the runner slows. In Noakes’ model, this occurs via a subconscious
regulatory system.
For the conscious controlling mechanism, Marcora refers to pain
perception and the level of motivation. The increase or decrease in by-
products causes changes in pain perception. As the pain increases, runners
consciously control their speed and thus force output. The more pain we
feel, the more we slow down. The body, in essence, is creating ever-
increasing levels of pain to protect itself and forces us to fold to its
demands no matter how much drive we have for pushing on. At some
point, pain levels will increase to such a high level that the athlete will be
forced to give in and slow. The degree to which and when this occurs
depends upon the level of each runner and is probably related to what we
typically think of as ‘mental toughness.’
The difference between regulation and catastrophic fatigue may seem
subtle, but they change the way in which we should view certain aspects
of training. For that reason, the next chapter will take an in-depth look at
this process.
--- PAGE 69 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 71 ---
3

--- PAGE 72 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 73 ---
The Brain: The Master
Controller
“Facts do not cease to exist because they are ignored.” Aldous Huxley
 
 
Integrating it All
Over the last decade, the way we perceive fatigue has radically
changed.  In some ways, this shift has mirrored trends seen in other
scientific areas, such as neuroscience, as we gain a greater appreciation for
the human mind and nervous system. Gone are the days of seeing fatigue
as the result of a single product, such as the much-maligned “lactic acid”.
Instead, the current thinking relies on a complex integrated model with a
dash of human emotion.
In a 2012 paper, Tim Noakes published a paper that’s title included
“Fatigue is a brain derived human emotion.” (Noakes, 2012). While the
paper itself is fascinating, the title sums up the shift in how we perceive
fatigue. While there is much research to be done, the newer models of
fatigue help explain not only the scientific evidence but perhaps more
importantly, the feelings that runners everywhere experience when they put
their all into a race.
 
Violating Homeostasis
The central change in how we look at fatigue occurred as a result of
Tim Noakes’ Central Governor Model in the 2000’s. Since its introduction,
the model has been refined with new evidence, and similarly integrated
models have been developed. Regardless of the model, the central
difference is that exercise is regulated, not catastrophic. The traditional
catastrophic approach would be that any of the sources of fatigue
previously discussed would directly cause an athlete to slow down. The
classic example would be lactate buildup would cause your muscles to
slowly shut down. The integrated model flips the equation around and
posits that the traditional fatiguing products don’t directly cause fatigue.
--- PAGE 74 ---
Instead, they are simply feedback that the brain uses to regulate fatigue. As
an example, if we are exercising in the heat and our core temperature goes
up, the brain receives this information and starts shutting down muscle
fiber recruitment to slow the rise in core temperature.
The brain essentially acts as a safety mechanism with a goal of
preventing your body’s normal processes from venturing too far away from
homeostasis. Its ultimate goal is to protect itself from harm or damage.
Anytime we start venturing too far outside the norm, the brain steps in and
curtails the workload. This can occur through a variety of ways and can be
seen when glycogen is running low, core temperature is getting too high, or
oxygen to the brain is diminishing. Whatever the system, there is a limit to
how far away from normal it can go. This thermostat-like mechanism can
be adjusted and how far away one can go from norm can be influenced via
training.
What is even more intriguing is that the brain works in an
anticipatory manner. Instead of simply waiting until core temperature, for
example, gets to a critically high level and then shutting things down and
causing fatigue, the brain runs a complex calculation and slows you down
in anticipation of reaching this critical core temperature. This is why in a
time trial in the heat, your pace slows early on, despite not having enough
time to reach a critical core temperature. Or in the classic marathon
example, it’s why pace slows before a runner truly runs out of glycogen.
These are but a few examples, and in the rest of this chapter we will delve
into the complex concept that is fatigue. First, we will look at the brain
itself and how it functions during grueling exercise. Then, we’ll explore
what feedback signals might play a role and how this information may be
processed. Finally, the goal will be to integrate it all together and show
how the perception of pain might be the way in which the brain forces
compliance to stay within the realms of homeostasis.
 
The Brain
According to this model, the Brain is the master controller, so it only
makes sense to start there and work our way down. It has only been
recently that neuroscience has been combined with exercise science to
study what happens in the brain during and after exercise. This field will
--- PAGE 75 ---
continue to grow and our understanding of this complex interaction will
undoubtedly improve, but some interesting research has already shifted our
understanding.
One approach to understanding the brain’s role is to analyze how
perception changes. A study by Ando et al. (2012) provides a glimpse into
how the brain works under fatigued conditions. In a uniquely done study,
they looked at visual information processing during steady exercise. By
measuring reaction time to stimuli in the periphery of the visual field while
exercising, they can get an idea of how the brain processes information
under fatigue. The study found that while exercising at 75%Vo2max,
reaction time in the periphery diminished. Reaction time remained
relatively normal in the middle of the visual field but increased as the
stimuli were moved to the periphery. The visual field essentially narrowed.
It’s almost as if our brain said, ”we need to conserve resources, so focus
only on what is right in front of us, and ignore what occurs outside of this
range as it requires too many resources to process all of this information.”
What was most interesting is that having a higher aerobic capacity
attenuated this effect to a degree, meaning that the more aerobically fit
athletes didn’t suffer the drop in reaction time and processing that less
aerobically fit athletes did. A reduction in oxygen to the brain during
exercise could explain this change in visual perception. The fact that visual
perception and reaction time decreases in hypoxic conditions would seem
to lend credence to this idea.
The results of this study match up well with most runners experience
during races. In my own racing, during intense periods of the race, my
visual field tends to narrow and oftentimes I am unaware of anything
outside of the race. The more intensely focused I am, which normally
means a shorter more intense race like the mile, the more this tends to
happen. I can distinctly remember several races where I didn’t hear any
splits being called or people cheering for me from the stands, yet every lap
I could hear and see my coach standing in the stands on the backstretch
among a crowd of others. My brain had filtered out certain visual and
auditory stimuli and focused on or amplified others. It decided what is
important and what is most likely background noise that takes too much
energy to focus on right now.
--- PAGE 76 ---
This idea of cognitive focus and concentration fits well with concepts
in neuroscience outside of the world of running. A simplified concept
would be that the brain has to prioritize the information and stimuli that it
has to process. During a race, information is being processed on the
internal state of the muscles, heart, and so on, as well as information from
the outside world through visual processes. As a runner gains experience
racing, part of the improvement comes from the brain’s ability to filter
information and determine what is important versus what needs to be
ignored for the moment. This can be seen outside the running world and in
advertising for example, in the form of priming. If one is ‘primed’ for a
certain word or color, then they are more likely to pick that word out of a
paragraph or be able to spot a certain colored item in a visual scene. The
idea can be translated over into running and may explain why when you
are out there racing, it’s not unusual to pick out your significant other or
coach’s voice out of the crowd but not hear anyone else. This process of
learning what degree of importance internal and external stimuli should be
given is part of a person’s development as a runner.
Looking further into the brain to see how activity and blood flow
changes in certain areas provides some clues to why this altering of
perception may occur and how the brain regulates performance and
handles disruptions in homeostasis. Due to the limitations of the devices
used to measure brain activity and/or blood flow, most of the research has
been on isometric exercise or other simple exercise devices. Despite this
limitation, the findings are intriguing and show how fatigue as a whole is
handled.
Leading the charge in this area has been a group of studies by Hitly
et al. (2011). In an initial study they used fMRI to look at brain activity
during a series of fatiguing handgrip exercises. They set it up so that during
about half of the handgrip trials the subjects would not be able to maintain
the force required for the entire test. What they then looked for was what
areas of the brain were active just prior to the subject’s decision to “give
in” and have “task failure.” They found that the insular cortex and the
thalamus showed increased activation and concluded that:
 
“In accordance with other studies investigating sensations that
alert the organism to urgent homeostatic imbalance such as air
--- PAGE 77 ---
hunger, hunger for food, and pain, we assume that an increased
thalamo-insular activation in the context of a fatigue-induced
handgrip exercise could reflect increased homeostatic disturbance in
the exercising muscle and may be of essential importance by
mediating task failure to maintain the integrity of the organism.”
 
In other words, in this simple task, fatigue was a result of a desire to
maintain homeostasis. In a follow up study, Hitly (2011) used EEG while
performing a fatiguing cycling exercise to look at communication between
the insular cortex and the motor cortex. They found increased
communication between the two areas, and this combined with their
previous study made them speculate that the insular cortex might play a
key role in evaluating sensory feedback and communicating with the motor
cortex to maintain homeostasis.  While this research is still relatively new,
it provides a framework for how the brain could regulate exercise. While it
is too simplistic to expect these two areas to control everything, the point is
that the communication between areas of the brain that deal with
processing sensory input and areas that control motor output lends itself to
the idea that exercise is regulated, and as we shall see these areas of the
brain will keep popping up.
 
Playing Mad Scientist
With advances in science, we not only get new measurement
techniques like fMRI, but also new treatment devices that would appear to
be more science fiction than science fact to anyone a few decades ago. In
particular, advances in technology now allow scientists to stimulate parts
of our brain. This opens up a whole new world of study, and a whole new
set of ethical problems to go along with it.
Two different methods have been developed to stimulate specific
areas of the brain, transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) and
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). While each method differs, the
idea is to deliver low level current to specific areas of the brain. While the
devices are used in research to look at the function of brain circuits, there
has been a rising body of research that uses them as therapeutic devices. In
--- PAGE 78 ---
particular, several studies have shown that stimulating certain areas of the
brain may be beneficial for people suffering from depression.
What is more pertinent is research that originated in psychology. In
psychology studies, subjects would be put through a variety of cognitive or
memory type tasks before and after being stimulated by tDCS or TMS.
Across a wide range of studies, stimulating different parts of the brain
resulted in improved memory, time to fatigue, and response time during a
motor task (Davis, 2013). Additionally, it appears that the use of such
devices allows for skill learning to occur more quickly and accurately
following stimulation. Essentially, it cuts down the time taken to become
an “expert” significantly.
Given the array of findings, it shouldn’t be a surprise that someone
finally tested it out on athletic performance. Okano and colleagues used
tDCS over the temporal and insular cortex 20 minutes before doing a max
cycling exercise (2013). The study participants, national class cyclists,
improved their peak power output by 4%, which is a pretty large
performance increase. While the complexity of the subject is astounding,
the fact that stimulating the temporal and insular cortex can improve
performance surely lends credence to the idea that the brain is the master
controller. Whether the insular cortex ends up being the main part of the
master controller or not, it seems like stimulation of the brain might help
unlock that little extra reserve that our brain normally holds back. The
future research in this area could be fascinating and unlock the mysteries of
fatigue, performance, and why some people are able to summon up that
final kick and push through depths of pain that others can only imagine.
While this is fascinating from a scientific and performance
standpoint, it also leads down a deep dark hole. This research has led
researchers like Davis (2013) to question whether Neuro Doping is the next
wave of performance enhancement. My hope is that we don’t have to go
down this road, but with portable tDCS systems already on the market for
“enhanced video game play,” it’s only a matter of time before this hits the
world of athletics. For now, let’s ignore the depressing side of this research
and continue down the path of figuring out the brain’s role in fatigue.
 
Neurophysiology
--- PAGE 79 ---
Another approach to dissecting the brain’s role is to look at the
chemicals that make communication possible, the neurotransmitters. In
particular, the neurotransmitters serotonin and dopamine have shown
particular promise. While the research is only beginning, analyzing how
these chemicals may connect to fatigue provides further clues.
Serotonin is popularly known as the chemical in the brain that is
associated with depression due to the most well-known antidepressant
drugs, SSRI’s (Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), having their
primary action aimed at increasing serotonin levels in the brain. It’s not
surprising that serotonin has a wide range of roles, but for our purposes we
will focus on how it seems to be connected to mood and anxiety. On the
other hand, Dopamine is a chemical that’s most well known role is in the
reward pathway, as it is one of the key chemicals that are released during
any type of reward behavior. This can range from sex to food to social
interactions with our friends. In very simplistic terms, this reward pathway
is used to ingrain behavioral responses. So if Dopamine is released and
pleasure is felt, the brain is primed to repeat the same set of actions or
circumstances that it just did to get the reward. This is all fascinating, but
what role do they play in fatigue?
To investigate this, researchers have used drugs to manipulate the
levels of dopamine or serotonin in the brain during time trials. In a series of
studies by Roelands et al. (2013), cyclists were put through self-paced time
trials after the administration of an SSRI in hot conditions. What they
found was that subjects needed longer (2.3min) to complete the same
workload, but more interestingly the pacing strategies between the placebo
group and the SSRI was different. The SSRI subjects were slightly slower
during the middle portion of the time trial, but more significantly, they
were not able to “kick” at the end. As we will see later, the “kick” is a
result of a combination of reserve and drive. The fact that an SSRI
eliminated the kick means that serotonin plays a role in fatigue and that
perhaps, as Roelands put it, “increased serotonergic activity in the brain
may block access to the reserve capacity.”
Similar to serotonin, there have been several studies that have used
Dopamine reuptake inhibitors before time trials to look at its effect on
fatigue. In contrast to SSRI’s, dopamine reuptake inhibitors seemed to
improve performance in the heat (Roelands, 2013). In a series of studies
--- PAGE 80 ---
done in hot conditions, dopamine allowed for better maintenance of power
output throughout the time trial. Supporting the work using dopamine
reuptake inhibitors, Bridge et al. (2003) found that dopamine activity in the
hypothalamus was associated with exercise performance in the heat. In
their summary of the studies on dopamine and fatigue, Roelands concluded
that:
 
“From these studies, it seems fair to suggest that drugs acting
to enhance brain dopamine would change the initial anticipatory
setting of work rate by elevating arousal and motivational levels.
RPE would be reduced, resulting in a mismatch between the actual
and template RPE. Consequently, this would lead to an increased
work rate and heat production, until the conscious RPE returns to
anticipated levels for the time trial in the heat”
 
The conclusions above set the stage for how fatigue is regulated. It
appears that using drugs that alter neurotransmitters in the brain has a
profound effect on performance in the heat. The reason heat is often used is
because it is the poster child for exercise regulation. We never really
exercise until true heat exhaustion but instead are shut down early before
we hit some critical temperature. In fact, as you will see later, when
exercising in the heat, performance is regulated in an anticipatory function,
with the body shutting down muscle recruitment and thus decreasing
performance very early on in the race or time trial. Due to this fact, heat is
often used as a way to look at pacing and anticipatory regulation of
performance.
While serotonin and dopamine both have effects on
thermoregulation, what is interesting is the effect they both have on pacing
strategies. Manipulating serotonin in the brain seems to have a dampening
effect on the kick. With the kick largely being a result of the brain letting
the reins loose a bit because we are close to the finish and motivation and
psychological drive are high, it seems plausible that serotonin may play a
role in manipulating mood or drive. On the other hand, dopamine’s
contrasting performance enhancement seems to alter perception during
exercise in heat. In looking at the pacing strategies, it is almost as if the
dopamine-related drugs fool the body into thinking it is performing in a
--- PAGE 81 ---
cool environment, causes an “ignoring” of the relevant feedback, or most
likely allows for a person to tap into the “exercise reserve.” Of all the
possibilities, the latter is the most intriguing, and the one Roelands decided
on. The fact that dopaminergic drugs allow people to exercise beyond the
regular homeostasis limits demonstrates the power of regulation of exercise
via the brain. Knowing how regulation may occur in the brain itself, what
feedback in the body is actually monitored?
 
The Role of Feedback
In working our way down from the brain, the next step on this
pathway is to look at what the brain actually monitors. After all, if we are
stating that the brain plays a regulatory role, then its predictions and
regulation are only as good as the information that it receives. That
information can come from both internal and external sources, of which we
will start with the internal cues, before delving into what happens when
this feedback is blocked or manipulated.
The reality is that the brain likely monitors a large number of
processes going on in the periphery, and for the purpose of this book,
understanding every single item it monitors is not important, but rather the
concept is what is crucial. Having said that, we will focus on the items that
play a role in fatigue, and these internal factors include (Noakes, 2012; St
Clair Gibson, 2013; Roelands, 2013):
·       Partial Pressure of respiratory gases
o   Oxygen levels in brain and periphery
o   CO2 levels
·       Muscular Metabolites (Hydrogen ion, lactate, Calcium, free radicals,
etc.)
·       Muscle pH
·       Electrolyte concentration
·       Lactate and metabolic byproducts
·       Biomechanical properties
·       Muscle damage
·       Heat storage and core temperature
·       Glycogen and fuel stores
·       Emotional state
--- PAGE 82 ---
 
External factors:
·       Pace/Splits
·       Visual Feedback
·       Competitors
·       Auditory feedback/ encouragement
 
Looking at the internal sources of feedback, it is not terribly different
from the list of items that we thought directly caused fatigue. This
shouldn’t surprise anyone, as instead of an increase in hydrogen ion’s
causing the fatigue, the integrated model suggests that the brain monitors
their levels and as they approach “dangerous levels”, the brain causes
fatigue to keep them within normal limits. This change in mindset seems
subtle, but it has profound implications.
It’s unnecessary to go through each source of feedback, but exploring
some of the major sources helps demonstrate the concept. For example, we
can look at oxygen content in both the periphery and in the brain during
intense exercise or under simulated hypoxic conditions to see what role it
plays. A series of studies help elucidate what is actually going on (Goodall
et al. 2012). When exercising in hypoxic conditions, not only does oxygen
delivery decrease but also cerebral oxygen content. What is interesting is
that this decrease in cerebral oxygen is associated with a decrease in
voluntary activation of both muscles involved in the exercise and muscles
not involved in the exercise (Goodall, 2012). So a reduced cerebral oxygen
level causes a decreased ability to recruit muscles beyond those that are
already used and fatigued. Further corroborating this is the finding that
central neurons can sense reduced oxygen delivery and alter their activity
as a result (Ando et al. 2012). What all of this means is that cerebral
oxygen content can change motor drive?
Another example of this process can be seen by analyzing exercising
in the heat. When we exercise in the heat, critical fatigue occurs when core
temperature reaches around 40 degrees Celsius. Unless there is a
malfunction, the body shuts you down before you go beyond this critical
temperature to prevent damage. Anyone who races in the heat knows that it
isn’t a case of race hard until you are hot and then you slow down. Instead,
you slow down early on in the race. And not surprisingly, the research finds
--- PAGE 83 ---
the same phenomenon, a slowing early on in the race. We will discuss this
further in detail shortly in the pacing section, but what happens is that the
brain uses a teleoanticipation system where the knowledge of how long the
race is, the degree of rise in core temperature, and other factors are used to
anticipate reaching that critical core temperature. Essentially, if your core
temperature is rising too quickly for you to finish the race unscathed, the
brain will start shutting you down early to slow your pace and thus slow
the rate of heat accumulation (Schlader et al. 2013).
 While these are but two examples of how feedback from the internal
status of the body works, I hope you understand how the process works.
We could go through the same with glycogen depletion, as we never hit full
glycogen depletion, or any other source of feedback. These feedback
sources are simply warning signs. If they rise or change too quickly, it sets
off an alarm in the brain to do something to make sure that they don’t get
too far out of homeostasis. It’s a safety mechanism, and it’s one built with
redundancy to minimize the chances of catastrophe.
 
Manipulating Feedback
While grinding through a particularly nasty set of intervals, we’ve all
dreamed of what it would be like to block the signal of pain. Wouldn’t it be
wonderful if we could selectively ignore that sensation created by
feedback? In one of the more campy Pierce Brosnan James Bond movies,
one of his villains had sustained damage to the brain that prevented him
from feeling pain. Upon watching the movie, I couldn’t help but wonder
how fast he could run. While blocking pain might not be as wonderful as it
seems, after all how would we learn that touching a stove burns our hand
or any other myriad of situations, the idea of manipulating feedback to the
brain can provide some deep clues on how this feedback loop functions.
It took researchers a while, but they are finally having fun with some
studies. There are several different ways of manipulating feedback
involving either blocking it with drugs, introducing a fun dose of
deception, or shifting attention to “block” feedback psychologically. Each
provides its own clues that help elucidate what is actually going on.
In an experiment, Amann and colleagues (2006) used the drug
fentanyl to block afferent feedback during a 5km self-paced cycling time
--- PAGE 84 ---
trial. What occurred was not some super human performance because the
information from the muscles could not be transferred to the brain, but
instead, pacing went out the window. Without feedback, the participants
ran like your typical inexperienced freshman high school runner: out crazy
hard. In the study, the participants went out much quicker and harder,
building up a greater degree of “peripheral fatigue” because the brain had
no reason to regulate the pacing strategy. The second half of the trial, the
participants faded hard and interestingly had problems walking and
standing afterwards. What this study showed was that the feedback was
one of the ways in which the brain ensured that exhaustion occurred at the
finish line and not before. Essentially, the blocking of afferent feedback
had removed the initial counter balancing safety mechanism. With no
feedback, there was no way for the person to know they were going too
hard too soon. Thus, as we shall discuss shortly, feedback and anticipatory
projecting play a large role in pacing, and pacing may be a window into
our “central governor.”
The more amusing way to manipulate feedback is simply to lie to
your participants. While it may seem a little evil, deceiving subjects
provides good information on how we process external feedback. As a
coach, it would seem cruel to call out the wrong splits or tell our athletes
they are lifting more than they actually are, but it is exactly what a group of
researchers have done.
Starting with the simplest form of manipulation, a group of
researchers put their subjects through a 6-week lifting test (Ness & Patton,
2012). They had everyone do a 1 rep max lift on the incline bench at the
end of each week. At the end of the period though, they decided to be a
little devious and changed the labels on the weights being lifted. Due to
this act of deception, the subjects lifted on average 20lb more than they had
at any other point in the study, simply by changing the labels.
Moving on to the world of endurance, Castle et al. (2012) decided to
have some fun with cyclists exercising in the heat. They had their subjects
do time trials on three separate occasions. Once in a cool environment (22
degrees Celsius), once in hot conditions (31 degrees), and once in a
deceived condition where they were told that it was cool, but in actuality it
was 32 degrees. With this simple manipulation of the thermometer came
profound changes in performance. Not surprisingly, the cyclists performed
--- PAGE 85 ---
more work and covered a greater distance in the cooler temperatures, but as
you may have guessed, when they thought they were performing in
moderate temperatures but were actually performing in hot conditions, the
cyclists covered the same distance and had the same power output as when
they were actually in cool conditions. This is an amazing look at both the
psychology of performance and how external feedback matters.
Finally, in a study by Stone (2012), they took their subjects and
simply manipulated their competition. They had nine cyclists complete
four 4km time trials with the first two being used to ascertain a baseline.
On the next two time trials, they had participants race an avatar and this is
where the deception came in. They were told that the avatar simply
represented their best performance at baseline, which was true for trial
number three. But for the fourth trial, they programmed the avatar to go
just faster (102%) than their baseline performance. As you might expect
now, the deception resulted in a faster performance than any other time
trial completed. What is notable about this study is that they found that
difference was in anaerobic contribution to the exercise. The deceived trial
resulted in a greater anaerobic output at 90% of the time trial. What does
that mean? Simply that the cyclists were able to increase power output
earlier, and more so, at the end of the time trial. In essence, they were able
to kick longer and stronger. The implication for this is that they were able
to tap into their “anaerobic reserve” to a much greater amount. It was
almost as if their brains loosened the reins just a little.
This phenomenon of deception and manipulation raises many
fascinating questions. One pertinent to this discussion is one raised by
Stone (2012). How much information can we process? The field of sports
psychology largely deals with those thoughts that come into our brain,
which as we will see later could just be your brain vocalizing its internal
struggle of psychological drive versus maintaining homeostasis. To deal
with this there are numerous techniques of associative versus dissociative
thinking. While a full discourse is beyond the scope of this book, one
concept is the idea that given all this feedback, we can’t possibly pay full
attention to it all. In the world of neuroscience and cognitive psychology,
this concept is prevalent, and there are numerous studies examining how
much information we can process at a time. The idea is that our brains
must filter that which is pertinent and minimize that which isn’t. The
--- PAGE 86 ---
classic psychological demonstration is that if I have you repeat and
visualize the word red, let’s say 10 times in a row, now that word and the
constructs surrounding it will stick out slightly more. You’re brain will
notice red objects to a higher degree.
In the world of exercise performance, this concept that we have a
limited capacity to pay attention to all the relative feedback has some
interesting repercussions. First, it means that part of training is allowing the
body to consciously or subconsciously learn what feedback is important
and what is not. As we get better at this filtering, the gap between what the
feedback is telling us and how far our body will let us go, or what pacing
strategy we take, will narrow. Perhaps more intriguing is also that we
might have the ability to “block” feedback simply through thinking. One
theory is that by using dissociative thinking, we dampen down the amount
of feedback received from the periphery because we are essentially
clogging the pathway. Stone briefly mentioned that this dissociative
strategy has resulted in an increased tolerance to fatigue in several studies
and that it may be due to the “inability to simultaneously process distress
related cues from sensory inputs.” It doesn’t mean that this type of strategy
works all the time, but rather that what we pay attention to when we are
dealing with fatigue matters. The possibility for shifting focus to
manipulate feedback is one that needs to be explored.
While I haven’t gone as far as deliberately misleading athletes,
although I once worked with a very well-known coach who would fib to
his athletes telling them splits and workout times faster than they actually
were, you can see this phenomenon all around us. Many times I have
watched coaches yell at their athletes that they only have 400 meters left in
a cross-country race. Almost always, the actual distance is a little more
than what the coaches relayed. I don’t think the coaches were deliberately
doing it, but it was a situation where you might have 470 meters left, but it
sounds better to say 400, and hopefully that will snap the athlete into
thinking he is okay to start kicking. Calling out that you “only” have so
much left is simply a way of manipulating the athlete’s perception.
I’ve seen this same phenomenon in coaching college runners. On
numerous occasions, athletes have gone from looking like they were falling
apart to having a huge spurt of energy, simply after me telling them that if
they run X, they can PR. The realization that they can PR at just faster than
--- PAGE 87 ---
the current pace is enough feedback to lift them out of the doldrums of
fatigue, pain, and suffering.  
The point isn’t to go out and deceive your athletes but instead to
understand the role feedback plays. It goes beyond the academic and has a
practical purpose. What you tell your athletes or yourself while competing
and, more importantly, how you deal with that information matters. That is
a profound realization. In terms of practicality in coaching or training, it
means that another variable of the coach’s toolbox can be feedback. Don’t
lie to your athletes, but take away feedback. This is where “blind feedback
workouts” where athletes run without knowing the pace, distance, or any
number of variables, may be useful in teaching them to deal with the
demands of racing, and in learning what sort of feedback to tune into or
tune away from. Just like any ability, we can train how we receive, take in,
and discard the information that comes to our senses. And this ability may
just be the key to expert performance.
 
Perception of Effort
 
“Natural selection has set up the perception of pain as a token of
life-threatening bodily damage, and programmed us to avoid it.” Richard
Dawkins,
 
Perception governs reality. In the world of exercise, the perception of
effort and fatigue is not just some unpleasant state that we have to deal
with, but instead it is what ultimately may govern performance. We’re all
familiar with the concept of effort. It’s relatively straightforward, and as
runners we are familiar with the idea of dealing with ever increasing levels
of pain. Recently, the concept of dealing with pain and increasing effort has
shifted. Instead of seeing it as the old school, ”let’s see who is toughest and
can suffer the most;” thinking has shifted instead to maybe that sense of
effort is our brain’s way of telling us something important.
Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) is the common measurement
tool used in the world of exercise science to measure effort. It uses a
simple scale either from 1-10 or 6-20, with the higher numbers meaning
that the exercise is “harder.” This isn’t some complex measurement and is
--- PAGE 88 ---
no different than just asking the question: how hard would you rate this
exercise at the moment? And if we look at the research, it shouldn’t be that
surprising that as you go through a time trial, race, or any bout of exercise
towards exhaustion, RPE linearly increases until exercise is finished. This
isn’t mind-blowing work, as you go along in a race, exercise gets harder,
and your effort increases. But where does this sense of effort come from
and what does it mean?
In the previous section on feedback, we dealt with mostly a
subconscious controller that integrated all of the feedback from the
periphery. We don’t consciously know where exactly our glycogen stores
are at; it’s all subconsciously controlled. What perception of effort is
turning out to be is our conscious window into what is going on in the
subconscious. In other words, what we perceive as effort is simply another
form of feedback. It tells us how hard the body is working, whether our
core temperature might be reaching high levels, or whether something is
getting close to getting out of homeostasis in our muscles. The increased
effort may just be one of the controlling ways in which our brains try to
consciously slow us down. If this fails, as we will see later, it then “forces”
us to slow down through subconscious control.
Research has made big breakthroughs simply by switching the
viewpoint in which we see effort. One of the current theories on how effort
arises is called the reafferent corollary discharge theory (De Moree et al.
2012). What it states is that central motor command (activity in the motor
areas of the brain) helps control muscle activation during exercise and that
because of this increased muscle activity, the muscle afferents send back a
signal that is processed in the brain as increased perception of effort. It’s a
feedback loop where when we fatigue or speed up and need more muscle
activation, the motor areas of the brain increase their signal to the muscle,
and because there is more muscle activation, the sense of effort increases.
Essentially, we are consciously aware when our body needs to send the
signal to increase muscle activity.
But that is only half of the picture. What researchers realized is that
they needed to separate the physical sensation of fatigue from the
psychological effort. It may seem like a trivial distinction, but separating
out the physical symptoms from the effort provides further clues to how
the brain regulates performance. Swart and colleagues (2011) developed a
--- PAGE 89 ---
novel rating system to separate out these two parameters. They then had
cyclists do a series of trials rating Physical RPE (P-RPE) and a rating
called Task Effort and Awareness (TEA) that they developed to measure
psychological effort. What they were essentially looking at is how much
cognitive effort was needed, or as an example, how much one had to “dig
down” at each point. The cyclists performed a 100km time trial and
another 100km test at 70% of their time trial speed. At set distances
throughout the task, they included a series of 1km sprints during both
trials. The goal and point of including the sprints during both a maximal
and sub-maximal test was to determine the difference between effort and
the physical symptoms of effort.
What they discovered was that both psychological and physical effort
increases throughout exercise, but TEA only played a role in regulating
performance when performance was near maximal. During the time trial
TEA and P-RPE increased gradually, reaching it’s maximum at the end of
the exercise. And during the 1km sprints, TEA increased dramatically,
indicating that there was a large conscious effort to increase speed during
that 1km burst. During the 70% speed trial the sense of effort remained low
and in what they called the “subconscious zone.” During the sprints, the
sense of effort was increased to reach levels identical to that during the
maximal trial, while the physical sensations remained lower until the very
last sprint. What this demonstrated is that effort only governs performance
when homeostasis is close to being violated. Once that point occurs, it
takes more effort, or psychological drive, to convince the body to delve
just a little closer to that edge. This sense of effort plays a crucial role in
regulating performance as we shall see.
 
The Mismatch Theory
What we’re left with is our brain integrating all of the feedback from
both inside and outside our body, as well as our conscious perceptions and
sensation. So how does the brain make sense of all of this data and how is
it all processed and used to govern performance? Before quite answering
that question, let’s look at one more study.
De Konig and colleagues (2011) used a simple index they called the
Hazard score, which is a simple metric that looks at how hard we are
--- PAGE 90 ---
working and take into account how much longer we have to continue to
work hard for. The Hazard score can be simply defined as:
 
Hazard= Momentary RPE * Fraction of the distance remaining
 
Their goal was to look at how people regulated pace and to explain
the decision-making between speeding up and slowing down. They looked
at several different experiments tracking RPE during a self-paced time
trial, calculated the Hazard score and then plotted the hazard score against
whether the athlete sped up or slowed down. It turned out that using this
simple measurement correlated well with changes in pacing. The higher the
hazard score, the more the slowdown, and vice versa. Essentially, what it is
saying is that if your RPE is too high for how far you have left, you are
going to slow down.
 
Again, this should make complete logical sense, if we go out too
hard and are working hard in the first mile of a 5k race, we’re going to
slow down because we still have 2 more miles to go. On the other hand,
what the Hazard score predicts is that as we get closer to the finish line, it’s
easier to pick up the speed because the danger is decreased. We’re almost
done, so we can kick. In the study, they plotted hazard scores versus
distance completed, and not surprisingly the hardest part of the race is
during the middle portion. The effort is starting to get high, but it is still a
long way away from the finish. It’s no surprise that it is during this ½ to ¾
point of the race that many people fall off the pace. We reach a do or die
point in a race, where we make a combined conscious and subconscious
decision to fall off or fight on. This decision making point is largely based
on your hazard score.
The key to the hazard score though is the comparison. In this simple
little equation is something that is often overlooked. It is our expectations.
How we feel at a given moment during the race is compared to how we
expect to feel at that point in the race. If we feel better than expected, then
the hazard score is lower and we can pick it up or last at the same speed. It
is the mismatch between our expected feelings versus our actual feeling
that governs performance. There is one additional component that we have
touched on but have not explored and that is psychological drive.
--- PAGE 91 ---
Drive can be thought of as how far you’re willing to push, and how
important this race or contest is. They are intertwined and play a crucial
role in determining performance. Racing is inherently a very painful
endeavor, and we glorify toughness in pushing through that pain in our
sport. The role drive and importance play is more about slightly shifting
how far away from homeostasis we can push. A classic example I use is
where a runner I coach, Jackie Areson, was falling off the leader of a race
in a 5k. She hadn’t been paying attention to splits throughout the race and
suddenly with 400 to go looked at the clock and found out she had to
“only” run a 67 to hit the Olympic A standard. She went from losing
ground and falling 30m back to switching gears and running a 64 second
final lap to win. It wasn’t that she was “bagging” it, but instead the
importance of the competition instantly changed once she saw the splits
with 400m to go in the race. This is a unique example, but because the
importance and her psychological drive increased, how far into the depths
of pushing homeostasis changed for the better.
Psychological drive doesn’t always work in a positive manner as it
could act as a hindrance. We aren’t just talking about a meaningless
competition, but instead having fear of failure. In a situation where we
have a perfectionist distance runner, the drive could turn destructive. Drive
and motivation could be extremely high but it could be in the wrong
direction. In fact, some researchers have proposed that the “self talk” that
goes on in our head during a tough race is simply a battle between
psychological drive and homeostatic control (St. Clair Gibson, 2013). It is
a war being raged inside our head on how far to go or when to let go and
slow down. This is a topic more in line with sports psychology and beyond
the scope of this book, but the key to understand is that importance and
drive are critical parts of determining performance.
From the discussion above, we know that how we feel is a result of
physical and psychological effort, which is derived from internal feedback
from the muscles, heart, lungs, etc. and external feedback from splits,
distance, and so forth. If this were mathematics, we would break down all
of the above theories as follows:
 
Performance = Mismatch (Expected Effort/Actual Sense of Effort)
 
--- PAGE 92 ---
Where:
Expected Effort= Previous Experience+ Psychological drive
(importance)
Actual Sense of Effort= (Internal + External feedback)*
Hazard + current Psychological Drive
 
While this isn’t a perfect demonstration, the key is understanding that
our body integrates feedback consciously and subconsciously and transfers
this feedback as a sensation of pain and effort. When we race this effort is
then compared to how we expected to feel during the race at that point in
time. It is then integrated with how much psychological drive we have to
push through the pain, or as I’d like to call it, importance. If there is a
greater degree of importance, then the body lets the reins loose just a little,
and we can push to a slightly higher danger level. This is the essence of
pacing. It is the degree of mismatch that determines where our pacing and
ultimately our performance lie.
The brain is running a complex algorithm monitoring all of the above
factors to keep us from violating homeostasis. How far we can delve into
the danger zones is dependent on drive and importance at the moment, but
we can never fully go all the way into the depths of the well. There is
always a reserve because it is a protective mechanism. Hopefully by now
you understand the complex nature of how exercise is regulated, but before
leaving this topic let’s use two phenomenon to look at how this regulation
works in real life.
 
Kicking and Collapsing
If fatigue were a catastrophic event, once we hit fatigue that should
be the end of us. We should slow down and not be able to pick it back up.
Obviously, we know that doesn’t always happen. More often than not when
we reach the last stretch of the race, we can pick up the pace and manage a
kick to the finish. In the research world they like to refer to this as the “end
spurt” phenomenon. How it occurs offers a glimpse into the regulation of
exercise.
If we use the aforementioned model of exercise regulation, we know
that the peripheral fatigue by-products providing sensory feedback are
--- PAGE 93 ---
increasing throughout the run, but what changes the last portion of the race
is psychological drive and the hazard score. As we get closer to the finish,
your ability to push increases partly because the danger levels drop. There
is less worry about pushing too far because the end point is near. So what
the body does is let the reins loose a little bit. The chance of dangerous
fatigue happening too soon is greatly diminished, so the body provides just
a little more leeway. The kick is a result of the interplay between anaerobic
reserve, drive/reward, and a loosening of the safety mechanism from the
brain.
This phenomenon can be seen in studies that show that at the end of
the race, a greater amount of fatigue is allowed. For instance, Ugrinowitsch
and colleagues found that during the “kick” portion of the race, greater
levels of brain deoxygenation were allowed (2013). Additionally, we can
see that at the same time muscle recruitment increases. What this tells us is
that despite increasing fatigue, the brain lets us recruit just a little more
muscle and deal with just a bit more fatigue.
As previously mentioned, the ability to kick was tied to serotonin
levels in one study. The manipulation of serotonin through drugs showed
that once again everything is interconnected, as the change in serotonin
levels was thought to affect drive and motivation. Not surprisingly then, a
kick is not only dependent on being near the finish line but also on
psychological drive and importance. If you have a runner 5 meters in front
of you, your kick is likely to be much better than if you have no one to
catch! It seems like a no brainer, but it’s a wonderful demonstration of the
regulation that occurs on a psychological and physiological level.
Putting it all together, to have a successful kick, there has to be some
reserve left and enough reward or psychological drive. If this occurs, then
the reins are let loose just a bit more. Oftentimes when we think of a kick
we think of the ability to sprint at the end of the race, so most of the time
coaches work on sprinting to improve it. But the reality is that it depends
not only on our total capacity but also where we are in terms of using that
capacity when we reach the time to kick. Research has shown that the kick
is largely the result of tapping into our anaerobic capacity. The problem is
that many runners use a large portion of their anaerobic abilities to
maintain the pace during the race, so when it’s time to kick, even with lots
of motivation, they don’t have as big of a capacity to increase performance.
--- PAGE 94 ---
Thus the goal should be to have a larger capacity to use and training to be
less fatigued and not having used that capacity when it comes down to the
last 400 meters.
This is what happens when it goes right, but what happens when
there is a malfunction in the system? In a fantastic paper by St. Clair
Gibson (2013) they looked at why collapse happens during races. We have
all seen the athlete get to the last finishing stretch and then suddenly go
down and ultimately try to stumble or crawl to the finish. What they
hypothesized was that collapse was simply a result of this battle between
drive and homeostatic control. Collapse occurs when drive has forced an
ignoring of the warning signals from the brain for longer than is normal.
Then the brain begins to force a shut down and overwhelm drive.
The degree of collapse can vary between partial, meaning just to a
knee or stumbling, to full collapse, lying on the ground. The idea is that the
body has two systems of safety regulation. It has its primary system, which
involves increasing the feeling of pain to try and get you to stop, as well as
a reduction in muscle fiber recruitment to force slow down. But there is a
system if that isn’t enough, and that is a complete shutdown. It’s the last
ditch fail safe mechanism. Collapse might occur because it allows for an
easier way to return blood flow to the brain since the body does not have to
pump against gravity when the head is on the same plane.
Collapse, however, doesn’t occur simply from “toughness”. It’s
thought that it might be due to a failure to recognize the feedback that
serves as a warning. According to St. Clair Gibson, this could be due to a
failure of the receptors designed to integrate the signals or a down-
regulation of these signals. One example given is one that I’ve already
mentioned. During dissociative cognitive thinking, the processing of
feedback in the brain is manipulated, and in theory the feedback warning of
fatigue in the periphery is not processed.
If St. Clair Gibson and colleagues are correct, then collapse is simply
our last resort safety mechanism. It’s the airbag for our body. What
collapse gives us is a glimpse into how the body works. It shows what
occurs at the extremes of fatigue and drive. The fact is that exercise is
regulated. All of the peripheral fatiguing products that we have all heard
about since first putting on our spikes and racing all still matter, but instead
of directly being the culprits they are just information for the brain.
--- PAGE 95 ---
This isn’t just relevant for us scientific nerds but instead opens the
door for new possibilities in improving performance. No longer should
training only be physiologically centered, meaning training for “lactic
resistance,” but instead it should include the other parameters that lead to
performance. Namely, we can manipulate external feedback in workouts
quite easily, as well as work on psychological drive at the right times
(everyone’s driven in the first mile of a marathon…) and “turn the brain
off” at other points to minimize cognitive effort. If approached right, this
change in mindset should allow for a different understanding of how to
train for performance and possibly new types of workouts to solve that
problem.
Perhaps the best demonstration of the regulation of exercise is the
news stories that occasionally pop up with mothers showing superhuman
strength to lift a car off their child or some other similar scenario. While
the authenticity of such stories may be occasionally questionable, the
reality is that the body has a fantastic reserve capacity, and if drive and
importance are sufficient than our body lets the safety mechanisms go
because the risk is worth the reward. In racing, we’ll never get to that
point, but if we can steadily nudge how far away from homeostasis we can
get, then we’re on the right track towards improving performance.
 
--- PAGE 96 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 98 ---
4

--- PAGE 99 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 100 ---
An Oxygen Problem?
“We are going to relentlessly chase perfection, knowing full well we
will not catch it, because nothing is perfect. But we are going to relentlessly
chase it, because in the process we will catch excellence. I am not remotely
interested in just being good.” Vince Lombardi
 
Ask almost anyone what limits running performance and the
inevitable answer is oxygen. That may suffice for the general public, but
does that vague answer mean breathing in oxygen, transporting it, or
utilizing it in the muscles? In the first two chapters, oxygen’s role in
energy production and fatigue was discussed. To Understand oxygen’s
role let’s first look at how we measure oxygen’s impact and then at each
step from intake in the lungs to utilization in the muscles.
As a coach, oxygen’s importance is probably obvious, but it’s
important to delve deeper and realize that oxygen goes through numerous
steps from intake down to utilization. Understanding this process and
where the potential roadblocks lie will allow you to better train your
athletes. Workouts can be designed to address the specific limitations for
each individual athlete, as it is likely that some will have problems with
oxygen utilization while others might have an intake limitation.
 
The Measurement: VO2Max
“What’s your VO2max?” For any endurance athlete, this common
measurement seems to define your talent or potential. VO2max refers to
maximum oxygen consumption and is one of the most commonly
measured components when tracking changes in endurance performance.
We’ve all heard the stories of Lance Armstrong’s or Bjørn Dæhlie’s
incredibly high VO2max measurements, but should it really garner that
much attention? In short, no. Contrary to popular belief, VO2max is
simply a measurement and does not define fitness or potential. In fact,
among well-trained runners, it is impossible to discern who is the fastest
by VO2max. That does not mean that oxygen transport and utilization is
not important, it simply means that the measurement of VO2max does not
--- PAGE 101 ---
accurately reflect these processes. Before dispelling some of the VO2max
myths, let’s look at the contributing factors of VO2max.
VO2max refers to the maximum amount of oxygen used and is
calculated by taking the amount of oxygen taken in and subtracting the
oxygen exhaled out (Bassett & Howley, 2000). The measurement of
VO2max is commonly used to quantify the capacity of the aerobic system
and is potentially influenced by a variety of factors as oxygen makes its
way from the environment all the way to the mitochondria in the muscles.
To calculate VO2max the Fick equation is used, where Q equals Cardiac
Output, CaO2 equals arterial oxygen content, and CvO2 means venous
oxygen content:
VO2max= Q (CaO2-CvO2)
 
While the details aren’t crucial, this equation takes into account how
much blood your heart pumps and uses the difference between the level of
oxygen in the blood when heading to the muscles and then the level after
having dropped off the oxygen at the muscles. It’s no different than
calculating how many supplies are being dropped off at a department store
by comparing how many supplies a truck was carrying to the store and
how many were left on the truck when it left the drop-off.
In this equation, Cardiac Output is a measure of Stroke Volume (the
volume of blood pumped with each beat) and heart rate so that we know
the total amount being dispatched from the heart. Arterial oxygen content
is the amount of oxygen in the blood that is being delivered to the
muscles, while venous oxygen content refers to the amount of oxygen in
the blood that is returning to the heart and lungs. When the arterial and
venous oxygen contents are subtracted, the amount of oxygen being taken
up by the muscles is known.
While the measurement of VO2max is of little practical interest for
reasons to be discussed in the subsequent chapter, maximizing the body’s
ability to get and then use oxygen in the muscles is of the utmost
importance in running performance. The components affecting and
limiting this process can be divided into oxygen intake, transport, and
utilization. Oxygen’s route from the air all the way to the muscles is
largely driven by pressure gradient differentials, meaning that oxygen
likes to travel from an area of high concentration to one of low
--- PAGE 102 ---
concentration. So as we travel the path from air intake into the lungs all
the way down to the muscles, it is largely pushed along flowing from high
concentration to lower concentrations. The major steps include:
Oxygen Intake
Air intake to lungs
To bronchioli and alveoli where it diffuses to capillaries (blood)
Oxygen Transport
Cardiac output-pumps blood throughout
Hemoglobin concentration
Blood volume/shunting
Capillaries to diffuse the Oxygen into muscles
Oxygen Utilization
Transport to mitochondria
Use in Aerobic respiration and Electron Transport Chain
 
Oxygen Intake
The first step along oxygen’s journey is obviously getting it into the
body and ultimately the blood stream, which occurs mostly due to the
operation of the respiratory system. Air is taken in through the mouth or
nose due to subconscious control that relies on the pressure differential of
the outside air and that in the lungs. From here, the air proceeds down the
pharynx and into the lungs. In the lungs, the air travels first through the
bronchi and then into smaller tubes called the bronchioli.
At the end of the bronchioli tubes in the lungs are alveoli. This is the
site where oxygen transport from the lungs to the blood occurs. Oxygen
transport from the alveoli to the blood occurs with diffusion via
pulmonary capillaries. The capillaries are very small blood vessels that
allow for exchange to larger blood vessels via diffusion. The amount of
oxygen diffused depends on both the pressure difference between the
alveoli and the pulmonary capillaries and the total amount of pulmonary
capillaries. The amount of capillaries plays a role, especially in well-
trained athletes, because it allows for a longer period of time in which
inflowing blood is in contact, meaning that there is a longer time for
oxygen to diffuse into the blood.
--- PAGE 103 ---
Even at high intensities, the oxygen saturation in the blood is
normally above 95% (Powers et al., 1989). This has been used as evidence
that oxygen intake and transport from the lungs to the blood is not a
limiting factor since saturation is near full. However, in some well-trained
athletes, a phenomenon known as Exercise Induced Arterial Hypoxemia
(EIAH) occurs. EIAH causes oxygen saturation levels to drop by as much
as 15% below resting levels during heavy exercise. EIAH occurs because
the large Cardiac Output of well-trained individuals causes the blood to
move through the pulmonary capillaries so quickly that there is not
enough time for full diffusion of oxygen and thus saturation to occur.
Therefore, in some highly trained athletes, oxygen intake and diffusion
can reduce the VO2max.
EIAH is an overlooked phenomenon and could have implications in
elite endurance performance. As researchers, we often look for one main
limiter, however the limiter of a certain system or pathway changes based
on the individual’s physiological makeup and training. Due to the
enormous training loads of elite endurance athletes which greatly increase
oxygen transport, it is likely that there is a shift in the limiter from more of
a transport issue to an intake and diffusion issue.
Diffusion is an issue that is dependent on both oxygen intake and on
cardiac output (Wagner, 1996). The degree to which oxygen is saturated is
often thought of only in terms of the pressure gradient between the air and
the lungs and then the lungs and the blood. However, while the pressure
gradient and the attraction, or binding affinity, of oxygen to hemoglobin
play roles, the Cardiac Output of the heart also contributes. As already
mentioned, with a larger Cardiac Output blood moves through the area
where oxygen exchange occurs more quickly, resulting in less time
--- PAGE 104 ---
available for loading and unloading. This can be partially offset by an
increase in pulmonary capillaries. The larger cross-section of the
capillaries allows for a longer amount of time for oxygen saturation to
occur. If you find that an athlete has reduced oxygen saturation levels or
EIAH, it might be beneficial to try and enhance pulmonary capillarization
through various exercises designed to stress the pulmonary system.
Additionally, respiration could interfere with oxygen saturation.
High rates of ventilation can result in a mixing of the gases in the lungs
resulting in a ventilation-perfusion inequality (Wagner, 1996). In his
review on VO2max, Wagner notes that in the majority of normal subjects
there is evidence of some sort of pulmonary dysfunction (1996). The
results of which can be seen in the increase in alveolar-arterial PO2
difference with increasing exercise intensity.
The muscles that aid in respiration also play a role during exercise.
The oxygen cost of respiration contributes significantly to VO2max. At
moderate intensities, respiration accounts for 3-5% of VO2, while at
heavy intensities it accounts for ~10% of VO2max in untrained
individuals (Aaron et al., 1992). However, in well-trained athletes, it was
found that respiration accounted for 15-16% of VO2max during intense
exercise (Harms et al., 1998). What this means is that the act of ventilation
itself requires a larger oxygen and energetic load that must be accounted
for. These findings that respiration has a higher oxygen cost in well-
trained athletes lends credence to the idea that demands and limits in
trained versus untrained athletes are different.
Another potential reason that respiration could limit performance is
that the respiratory muscles compete for blood flow with skeletal muscle.
Due to this competition, diaphragm fatigue can occur at intensities greater
than 80% VO2max (Johnson et al., 1993). In a study by Harms, they
investigated this possibility by artificially increasing and decreasing the
respiratory muscle load (2000). They found that endurance was
significantly increased by 15% in the decreased respiratory muscle load
trial, while endurance was decreased by 14% when increased respiratory
muscle resistance was applied. While such studies demonstrate in theory
that respiratory fatigue occurs, what happens in the real world? A study by
Romer provides an answer as it found that global inspiratory muscle
fatigue occurred during 20 and 40km cycling time trials (2002).
--- PAGE 105 ---
If respiration can impact performance, can we do anything to train
the respiratory muscles? The study by Romer set out to evaluate this as
well, finding that using inspiratory muscle training improved performance
over the 20km and 40km trials by 3.8% and 4.6% when compared to a
control group and resulted in a reduction of respiratory muscle fatigue
post-trial. Other studies investigating respiratory training have been
mixed. Several studies have seen increases in performance in cyclists and
rowers (Volianitis et al., 2001; McConnell & Sharpe, 2005). On the other
hand, several authors have found no change in performance with training
(Williams et al., 2002; Inbar et al., 2000). In a review on the subject, Sheel
found that out of eight studies done, six showed improvements in
performance following respiratory training (2002). The contrasting results
are likely due to whether oxygen intake and respiration were the
participant’s main limiter. As we have seen, the degree to which the
respiratory muscles contribute to VO2max varies based on training level.
For higher-level runners, it is likely that respiratory fatigue or EIAH
occurs due to changes discussed previously. For this reason, higher-level
runners should consider respiratory training, while lower level runners
probably will not see the same degree of benefit.
Oxygen Transport
 Since A.V. Hill’s first experiments measuring VO2max, oxygen
transport has always been considered the major limiter of VO2max
(Bassett & Howley, 2000). Oxygen transport refers to transporting the
oxygen from where it enters the bloodstream all the way to the muscles
that will take it up and use it. Di Prampero calculated that oxygen
--- PAGE 106 ---
transport accounted for 70-75% of the limitation of VO2max (2003). The
rate of oxygen delivery is dependent on several factors.
 
Heart Adaptations
The heart’s Cardiac Output (CO) refers to the amount of blood that
is pumped out of the heart each minute and is usually regarded as the
major limiter of VO2max. CO is dependent on two factors, as it is
calculated by multiplying Heart Rate (HR) and Stroke Volume (SV). Thus
to increase maximum CO, one of these factors would have to be modified.
Maximal HR is a factor that does not change due to training or even
lowers slightly, while submaximal HR is lowered with training (Brooks et
al., 2004; Levine, 2008). However, with endurance training, SV increases
at rest and all intensities.
The increase in SV is primarily due to an increase in heart size and
contractility. These changes to the heart cause an improvement its ability
to rapidly fill and an increase in the End-diastolic Volume (EDV), which is
the amount of blood present at the end of filling. According to the Frank-
Starling mechanism, the greater the stretch on the heart (or EDV), the
greater the subsequent contraction is. Think of it as a rubber band-like
effect. This means that an increase in EDV, which would create a greater
pre-stretch, would increase the subsequent ejection, or SV. Increasing
EDV thus plays a central role in increasing SV. In addition, endurance
athletes have an increased ability to rapidly fill the heart at high
intensities, which is important as at higher intensities there is less time
between heart beats for the heart to fill (Levine, 2008). Further supporting
this idea, work by Levine et al. showed that in endurance athletes, their
increased SV was almost entirely a result of EDV increases due to
enhanced compliance of the heart (1991).
Traditionally, the increase of Cardiac Output during progressive
maximum exercise has been seen to occur with an initial rise in SV, which
then plateaus, while HR continuously increases to maximum. However,
recent evidence points to some elite endurance athletes having a continual
rise in SV and without exhibiting a plateau (Rowland, 2009). The data is
conflicting on whether this phenomenon occurs and, if it does occur, the
reasons for it. Rowland suggests that if it does occur the likely mechanism
--- PAGE 107 ---
is an increase in end-diastolic filling, which when accompanied by an
enhanced Frank-Starling mechanism, would result in an increasing SV
(2009). This increasing CO throughout exercise is an interesting
phenomenon and could point, once again, to the individual nature of
VO2max limitation.
One other mechanism that increases end-diastolic filling is an
increase in blood volume. A study done by Krip manipulated blood
volume in endurance trained and untrained individuals and studied its
effect on cardiac function (1997). They found that blood volume increases
and decreases caused significant alterations in maximal diastolic filling
rate, SV, and CO. These results demonstrate that increases in blood
volume, which is an effect of endurance training, improve SV and CO via
enhanced diastolic filling.
 As mentioned previously, a high Cardiac Output can have negative
consequences in regards to oxygen delivery. With a high output, the
diffusion time for oxygen in the lungs and muscles is greatly reduced
because of how fast the blood moves through the oxygen exchange zone.
The body must do a balancing act to elicit optimal oxygen delivery. This
balancing points to a limit of effective Cardiac Output increase if a
subsequent increase in diffusion capacity does not occur. This can be seen
at extreme altitudes where in theory, despite increases in Cardiac Output,
oxygen uptake would not increase due to diffusion limitations (Wagner,
1996).
 
 
Hemoglobin
Another major factor in oxygen transport is the oxygen carrying
capacity of the blood itself. This is dependent on the Red Blood Cell
(RBC) mass and the Hemoglobin (Hb) concentration, which serves as the
major carrier of oxygen in the blood. Red blood cells serve as the blood
cells that carry oxygen, while hemoglobin is an iron containing protein
--- PAGE 108 ---
within red blood cells that binds with oxygen to transport it to the
muscles. The degree to which oxygen binds to hemoglobin is dependent
on the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood and the affinity between
oxygen and Hb. The affinity of Hb and oxygen is how strongly attracted to
each other each component is, and it is affected by temperature, pH,
hydrogen ion concentration, and carbon dioxide concentration. Hb affinity
is once again a situation of balance. While having a high affinity would
seem like a positive adaptation, as it would allow more oxygen to bind to
Hb, it would also make it more difficult for the oxygen to detach from the
Hb when going from the blood to the muscle.
An increase in Hb would improve performance via allowing for an
increased transport of oxygen to the muscles. Research has demonstrated
this relationship via seeing how reductions in Hb affect performance
(Calbet et al., 2006). For example, a reduction in Hb because of anemia
has been shown to decrease VO2max (Lamanca & Haymes, 1993).
Interestingly, in a series of studies by Ekbolm, after reducing hemoglobin
levels via withdrawal of blood and seeing the initial drop in Hb, VO2max,
and endurance, after 2 weeks VO2max returned to normal despite Hb and
endurance performance being still reduced (1972). This may point to an
adjustment made when blood withdrawal occurs that acutely compensates
for the drop in Hb that restores VO2max. The fact that VO2max could be
restored while still having low Hb raises some interesting questions and
shows the remarkable adaptation potential of the body and reminds us that
there are many different ways to optimize oxygen delivery to reach
VO2max. In addition, the return of VO2max but not performance points
to the idea that VO2max and endurance performance cannot be considered
synonymous.
On the other end of the spectrum, in studies artificially increasing
Hb levels, VO2max and performance have been shown to increase (Calbet
et al., 2006). In one particular study by Buick, elite distance runners
showed significant improvements in time to exhaustion and VO2max
following a blood transfusion that increased Hb levels from 15.7 to 16.7 g.
100 ml-1 (1980). In a study on blood doping, which artificially increases
Hb levels, improvements in VO2max have been between 4% and 9%
(Gledhill 1982). Given the reliance on blood doping of such drug cheats as
--- PAGE 109 ---
Lance Armstrong, it should come as no surprise that artificially increasing
the hemoglobin levels improves performance.
 
Blood Volume and Blood Shunting
With an increase in the hemoglobin, the blood itself becomes more
viscous, or thicker, as more of the blood contains red blood cells as
opposed to plasma. The hematocrit is a measure of the ratio between red
blood cells and plasma. With this increase in viscosity, the rate of blood
flow is slowed, thus decreasing oxygen and nutrient delivery to the
muscles. Therefore, too high a hematocrit could potentially decrease
performance via a slowing of the delivery rate. As can be seen, it is once
again a balancing act between the rate of blood flow and the carrying
capacity of the blood on what best delivers the most oxygen and nutrients
to the muscles. This process can be compared to either having a large
truck that can carry a lot of goods but only reach 55mph or having a fast
sports car with little space that can reach 120mph. If the goal is to deliver
the most goods continuously, the optimal combination is likely a vehicle
with moderate storage room and moderate speed.
With endurance training, blood volume is normally increased along
with hematocrit and Hb. The body seems to self-regulate in creating an
optimal hematocrit to allow for an increased carrying capacity of the
blood while also having adequate blood viscosity. However, it is not clear
whether a high hematocrit with higher viscosity or a lower hematocrit
with a lower viscosity is better for endurance performance. Athletes using
illegal drugs, such as Erythropoietin (EPO), to artificially boost red blood
cell production have performed well with dangerously high hematocrits
(Calbet et al., 2006). On the other hand, several world-class African
runners perform well with very low hematocrit and Hb levels that would
--- PAGE 110 ---
normally suggest anemia (Canova, Oct. 2007). It is likely that this is
because of their large blood volumes from endurance training, and it is
possible that this reflects an alternative way of adaptation to altitude,
which will be discussed below. The question on which delivers oxygen the
best and improves performance the most is unanswered.
It is possible that the optimal way to deliver oxygen in terms of
blood Hb and hematocrit varies based on the individual. In looking at the
way particular groups of people adapt to altitude, it is not a stretch to see a
similar variation in whether groups respond best to higher Hb/hematocrit
or lower hematocrit/higher plasma volume. There is an Ethiopian-specific
pattern of adaptation to altitude to go along with the previously found
Andean and Tibetan patterns (Beall et al., 2002). The Andean response
consists of erythrocytosis (RBC increase) with arterial hypoxemia
(reduced oxygen saturation), the Tibetan pattern shows normal Hb
concentration with arterial hypoxemia, and the Ethiopian pattern consists
of maintenance of Hb concentrations and oxygen saturation levels. The
maintenance of oxygen saturation levels at high altitudes points to some
improvement in oxygen diffusion ability from the lungs to the blood or
increased Oxygen-Hb affinity. The exact mechanisms are unknown, but
the fact that several different patterns of adaptation have been found at
altitude points to the idea that different adaptation mechanisms could
occur in optimizing the blood parameters mentioned above.
One other consideration is that when exercising the body reroutes a
larger portion of the blood volume to working muscles and essential
organs. This is called blood shunting and allows for more blood and
oxygen to be available for the working muscles. At rest, only 15-20% of
the total blood volume goes to the muscles, while 85-90% goes to the
muscles during exercise (Maglischo, 2003). This process occurs because
of dilation and constriction of the arteries, with dilation opening up the
arteries thereby reducing restriction of blood flow to the working muscles.
 
Capillary Density
Lastly, oxygen in the bloodstream has to get into the muscles. This
process is aided by capillaries, which are the body’s smallest blood
vessels. In this case, they surround muscle fibers providing a place where
--- PAGE 111 ---
substances can diffuse from the capillaries into the muscles or vice versa.
This diffusion is how oxygen gets into the muscle fibers, and lactate and
carbon dioxide are transported from the fibers to the capillaries. As
mentioned already in regards to oxygen saturation in the blood, a larger
density of capillaries allows for a longer amount of time for oxygen
diffusion to occur. Capillary density has been shown to increase with
endurance training, particularly intensive endurance training (Billat,
2003). In addition, capillary density has previously correlated with
VO2max (Basset & Howley, 2000).
 
Oxygen Utilization
Once oxygen is delivered to the muscles it then must be utilized.
Oxygen utilization takes place in the powerhouse of the cell, the
mitochondria, which is where it helps produce energy. We can quantify the
oxygen utilized by the muscles by looking at the arterial-venous oxygen
(a-vO2) difference, which tells the difference between the oxygen in the
arterioles and the content in the veins. Oxygen utilization by the muscles
is generally not considered to be a major limiter of VO2max. This
conclusion has been reached from two main lines of reasoning. First, peak
a-vO2 differences in elites and non-elites are not very large (Hagberg et
al., 1985). Secondly, in looking at the a-vO2 difference, it can be seen that
there is not much oxygen leftover in the veins. Arterial oxygen content is
around 200 mL of O2/L, while venous oxygen content is approximately
20-30 mL of O2/L (Bassett, 2000).
In simply looking at the numbers listed above, common sense would
have us ask why there is even 20-30mL of O2 leftover. While it may not
be the main governor of VO2max, a-vO2 is a factor that can be improved
with training. While contributing much less to VO2max, it is important to
remember that even a fraction of a percent improvement is crucial in the
world of elite athletics. In several studies, a-vO2 difference has been
shown to increase with long-term endurance training by as much as 11%
(Bassett & Howley, 2000; Saltin, 1973; Wilmore et al., 2001).
Recognizing this fact, it appears that while not a major limiter to
VO2max, it does play a role and therefore should be considered a relevant
training adaptation.
--- PAGE 112 ---
In addition, the question still remains as to why there is not full
extraction of oxygen by the muscle. Venous Hb concentration has been
reported as ~15% in normal subjects (Wagner, 1996). There are several
possibilities for limitations in oxygen transport from the blood to the site
that uses it in the muscle, the mitochondria. These include the capillary
density, which would allow for greater contact time and diffusion, the
diffusion distance, and myoglobin concentration, which serves to transport
oxygen from the cell into the mitochondria. In his review on the subject,
Wagner concludes that distance to the mitochondria is not a major factor
because of the high intracellular oxygen conductance (1996). Animal
studies, for example, one by Bebout using dogs, suggest that muscle
capillary density is the main structural factor affecting muscle oxygen
conductance (1993).
 
 
Oxygen’s final destination in the muscle cells is the mitochondria.
The Mitochondria is the site in the muscle cell in which aerobic energy
generation takes place. To be transported across the muscle cell to the
mitochondria, myoglobin is required. Myoglobin transports oxygen from
the cell membrane of a muscle fiber to the mitochondria. Greater
myoglobin concentrations would allow for more oxygen transport to the
mitochondria, potentially enhancing oxygen delivery and thus
performance.
 Oxygen is used in the mitochondria during the Electron Transport
Chain. Therefore the amount of mitochondria plays a large role in aerobic
energy generation. In theory, the more mitochondria, the more oxygen
utilization, and extraction that can occur in the muscle. However, many
studies have shown that while mitochondrial enzymes increase
--- PAGE 113 ---
significantly with training, the corresponding change in VO2max is much
less. Mitochondrial enzymes function to aid the chemical reactions needed
to eventually generate energy. In one study monitoring changes with
training and detraining, mitochondrial capacity increased by 30% with
training, while VO2max increased by only 19%.However, VO2max
improvements lasted much longer during the detraining phase than
mitochondrial capacity (Henriksson & Reitman, 1977). Mitochondrial
enzyme concentrations are much more likely to affect other factors in
performance to a greater degree than VO2max, like Lactate Threshold and
substrate utilization (Bassett & Howley, 2000; Klausen et al., 1981).
 
The VO2max Limiter
Having gone through the possible limiters of VO2max, it is
important to remember that there is not a single limiting factor and that
VO2max can be impeded at several points as oxygen travels from the
ambient air to the mitochondria. In his review on the subject Wagner
eloquently stated that:
“The concept of ‘the’ limiting factor to VO2max is no
longer an appropriate concept. All parts of the O2 transport
pathway are involved in determining VO2max. Thus a
change in O2 conductance of any one component will
change VO2max in the same direction (1996, pg. 29).”
 
This idea should be expanded out to include that the impact of each
step will vary based on the individual, training status, exercise, and
environment. Several examples of this can be seen in comparing different
groups of subjects, some of which have been briefly mentioned. Oxygen
diffusion from the lungs to the blood is rarely considered a limiter of
exercise in healthy individuals at sea level. However, the phenomenon of
EIAH occurs in many well-trained endurance athletes. This drop in
oxygen saturation in well-trained individuals significantly impacts
VO2max. Thus the relative importance of oxygen saturation’s impact on
VO2max changes with training status (Dempsey & Wagner, 1999).
--- PAGE 114 ---
In a similar demonstration, a study by Powers showed the variation
in the main limiter of VO2max between highly trained and normal
subjects (1989). They tested VO2max while inhaling normal air and
oxygen enriched air in both groups. In the normal group, VO2max was not
significantly different while inhaling either type of air. In contrast, the
highly trained group saw a significant increase in VO2max (from 70.1 to
74.7 ml/kg/min) when inhaling oxygen-enriched air. This leads to the
conclusion that oxygen intake plays a role in limiting VO2max in highly
trained people but not in normal subjects, thus showing the impact of
training status and endurance capacities. Lastly, the different adaptation
responses to altitude in Ethiopian, Tibetan, and Andean groups shows that
several different mechanisms can occur to reach the same goal of
maintenance of Oxygen delivery.
While the focus for almost a century has been on oxygen transport
being the limiter, oxygen utilization could play a role to some degree as
increases in peripheral factors, such as oxygen extraction measured by a-
vO2 difference, have been shown to cause a small, but significant,
increase in VO2max (Wilmore et al., 2001). In conclusion, the takeaway
message is that the individual physiology, the training done by a person,
and potentially other factors can shift the limitation of VO2max to a
number of different sites or alter the degree to which the various sites limit
oxygen transport and even oxygen utilization. The bottom line is that
VO2max represents a summary of many different processes that affect
fatigue and thus performance. The absolute total number is not as
important as how each path along the route to oxygen utilization in the
muscles functions.
Instead of worrying about the absolute number, for performance
worry about ways to increase the amount of energy that is produced
aerobically, and that means improving each step of the process. By
understanding the different spots of potential slow down along oxygen’s
route, a coach can design training around an athlete’s specific needs. As
can be seen, the weak point is likely to change as a runner develops, so the
training will have to shift slightly too. Without understanding the entire
process of oxygen delivery and utilization, we end up relying on generic
one-size fits all training recommendations for improving the aerobic
system, which as you can hopefully see is incorrect.
--- PAGE 115 ---
 

--- PAGE 116 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 118 ---
 5

--- PAGE 119 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 120 ---
The Fallacy of VO2max
“If you are a scientist and believe in truth, you’ve got to say you don’t
know when you don’t know. There’s always a temptation, especially if you
have a theory, to try to prove it rather than to find out what is the truth.”
Frederick Sanger
 
In a comprehensive review of training, Midgley and McNaughton’s
first sentence states “The maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max) has been
suggested to be the single most important physiological capacity in
determining endurance running performance” (2006). Based on this
notion, training for distance runners has become fixated on the concept of
VO2max. Training to enhance VO2max is the subject of numerous review
articles and popular coaching material. A whole theory of training has
evolved based on the idea of training at the speed that corresponds with
VO2max and at certain percentages of VO2max (Daniels, 2005). Given
the emphasis on this particular parameter, one would assume that it must
be very closely tied to performance and fatigue. It’s not.
In the following chapter, the limitations of VO2max will be
discussed. Including the legitimacy of the variable itself, why it arose to
such prominence, the efficacy of basing training paces off of it, the
question of should we even train to improve it, and how closely it ties to
performance. The discussion focuses on VO2max as a measurement, not
necessarily the importance of oxygen transport and use. This is of the
utmost importance for coaches because VO2max training has become a
staple in the training lexicon.
 
How the VO2max Concept Developed
The route scientific progress takes is highly dependent on what we
can measure at the time, and with the ability to measure oxygen
consumption first arising in the early 1920’s, VO2max became an early
darling of the physiologist world. It was in 1923 when A.V. Hill and his
partner H. Lupton came up with the idea of there being an upper limit on
oxygen consumption. In true pioneer fashion, Hill was the participant in
his own study. Hill ran at various speeds around a grass track while
--- PAGE 121 ---
measuring VO2 and found that he reached a VO2max of 4.080 L/min at a
speed 243m/min (Bassett, 2000). Despite increases in speed, his VO2 did
not increase, leading Hill to conclude that there is a maximum limit to
oxygen consumption, or in his words:
 
“In running the oxygen requirement increases continuously
as the speed increases attaining enormous values at the highest
speeds: the actual oxygen intake, however, reaches a maximum
beyond which no effort can drive it… The oxygen intake may
attain its maximum and remain constant merely because it
cannot go any higher owing to the limitations of the circulatory
and respiratory system” (Noakes, 2008, pg. 575).
 
These findings led to two lasting conclusions. First, that VO2max is
limited by the circulatory and respiratory system. The second conclusion
was the result of trying to devise a laboratory test for determining
VO2max, in which thirty years later, Taylor and colleagues decided that
during a graded exercise test a VO2max was obtained when a plateau
occurred in VO2 (Noakes, 2008). However, in Taylor’s original definition,
a plateau was not a true plateau but rather consisted of a VO2 increase of
less than 150ml/min from one workload to the next. These findings led to
the idea that in order for a true VO2max to be reached, a plateau of the
VO2 should occur.
Understanding how the VO2max test came about is important as it
impacts the way we currently view and use the parameter. The fact that
VO2max was first measured during exercise by one of the pioneers of
Exercise Science in the 1920’s goes a long way in explaining the level of
importance ascribed to it. Whenever a new parameter is discovered or
introduced, a large degree of emphasis is put on that parameter in the
research. The initial reaction by many scientists is to assign a great deal of
significance to the newly discovered parameter as if it will answer all of
the questions that we have. It is almost as if it is human nature to go
through this process of discovery and then exaggeration of the importance
of the new finding. This can be seen in many instances in a wide degree of
scientific fields. In Exercise Science, this may best be demonstrated by the
rise of the anaerobic or lactate threshold during the 1970’s, 80’s, and 90’s.
--- PAGE 122 ---
With the ability to portably test lactate, research was centered on ways to
improve lactate threshold and the various methods to test for it. Coaches
also devised ways of using lactate testing as a way of manipulating the
training of their athletes. Over time, the use of lactate testing and the
lactate threshold have slowly decreased and settled into the level of
importance that it most likely deserves. Whenever something is new, it is
overemphasized, before it eventually settles into its rightful place of
importance over time.
Due to the very early development of the VO2max concept, a large
amount of early research and study was focused on it, escalating the
importance given to the parameter. In addition, theories were developed
utilizing the VO2max concept very early on as it was one of the only
things that was measurable. The problem is that early development of the
VO2max concept created a situation where there was an enormous
amount of data and research surrounding it, in essence creating a concept
that is too large to break down. It is almost as if the field of Exercise
Science was built upon the VO2max concept.
Recently, the legitimacy of VO2max as a measurement and the
acceptance of VO2max as a practical measurement of cardio-respiratory
endurance have been called into question. The contention is that VO2max
is not actually a representative measure of the maximum ability to
transport oxygen but is rather controlled by a central governor. In Tim
Noakes’ Central Governor Model (CGM), the CGM predicts that the body
regulates exercise to prevent myocardial ischemia during exercise. This is
accomplished by limiting the blood flow to the periphery which the brain
accomplishes by regulating muscle recruitment (Noakes & Marino, 2009).
Therefore, VO2max reflects this regulation of muscles recruitment. In
essence, a central governor acts as a regulator for exercise instead of
exercise being limited by some parameter.
The basis of the CGM was described in a previous chapter, but it
can be explained with the quote from Noakes that states that “The CGM
predicts that a wide range of biological signals are monitored to ensure
that exercise always terminates before the loss of homeostasis in any
bodily system. (2009, pg. 339).” In essence, the key to understanding the
CGM is that exercise is regulated, not limited, and that this regulation is
done to ensure the protection of vital organs. Instead of the production of
--- PAGE 123 ---
so-called by-products such as H+ directly causing fatigue, these
substances act as feedback to a central governor which then adjusts the
workload to ensure that homeostasis is maintained.
There are several theoretical arguments for this model or another
similar integrated model. Noakes and other CGM proponents point to the
fact that fatigue is seldom catastrophic as would be predicted by
traditional models. Instead, the body uses various feedback information
and past experiences to modulate power output or, in the case of running,
pace. The idea of pacing being prevalent in endurance events and the fact
that a finishing kick, or end spurt, occurs are given as further evidence to
support this model (Noakes, 2003). Interestingly, evidence of alterations in
pacing strategy and EMG, which measures muscle activation, can be seen
from the very beginning of performance, such as that seen when racing in
warm versus cool weather, lending credence to the anticipation model of
fatigue (Noakes, 2008).
An increase in muscle activation is also seen during the last
segments of races which should not occur if the muscle is “failing” due to
fatigue. Noakes’ hypothesis is that at the end of a race the body’s feedback
says that it is near completion so that it can push slightly deeper into its
capacity (Noakes, 2008). Evidence for this hypothesis can be seen in a
study that found that when completing a 20-km cycling trial in normoxia
versus hyperoxia, the improvement in power output in hyperoxia was
proportional to the increase in iEMG that also occurred, which the authors
cited as evidence that control of muscle activation was one way in which
performance was regulated (Tucker et al., 2007).
Another interesting point raised in the CGM debate is the effect
hypoxia has on Cardiac Output. Exercise in hypoxic conditions shows a
reduction in peak Cardiac Output, due to both a decrease in HR and SV
(Calbet et al., 2003). According to the conventional model Cardiac
Output, since it is regulated by muscle oxygen demands, should not be
reduced. However, in the CGM, Cardiac Output is reduced as a regulatory
mechanism and is determined by the work done by the muscles (Noakes,
2004). Thus, a reduction in Cardiac Output in hypoxia is due to a decrease
in muscle activation. When supplementary oxygen is taken, Cardiac
Output immediately increases to normal levels (Noakes, 2004). This
immediate increase in Cardiac Output demonstrates that there is a
--- PAGE 124 ---
regulatory mechanism in control, and one has to question why Cardiac
Output is reduced at altitude when oxygen demand by the muscles should
be higher.
 
The Testing Plateau Problem
In regards to VO2max and how it is tested, Noakes has pointed out
that in most cases the original requirement of seeing a plateau in VO2max
during an incremental exercise test does not occur (Noakes, 2008).
Demonstrating this lack of plateau, in a study on world-class cyclists only
47% reached a plateau, prompting the authors of the study to state that
their limitations might not be oxygen dependent (Noakes, 2008). It is
amusing that some authors have commented that motivation may be the
reason some athletes do not reach a plateau (Shephard, 2009). This could
be a valid statement if the subjects were sedentary; however, since the
above study was with world-class cyclists, it seems a bit ludicrous to
suggest that motivation during a maximum test would be a problem with
such athletes. In addition, in other studies including one by Hawkins, there
have been individual variations in VO2max levels between the traditional
incremental test and a supramaximal test (Noakes, 2008). While in the
average of the whole group there were no differences between the tests,
the fact that certain individuals showed different VO2max is interesting
and shows that the traditional test does not always give the highest VO2.
Combining the fact that a plateau does not occur in many subjects
and the fact that some individuals reached higher VO2max values during a
supramaximal test than the standard incremental one, the use of the
standard incremental VO2max should be called into question. Other
studies show that knowing or not knowing when a test or trial will end
significantly affects physiological parameters, which lends credence to the
aforementioned idea. In a study by Baden, they demonstrated that during a
submaximal run Running Economy significantly changed, along with
perceived exertion, based on whether or not the group knew they were
running for 20 minutes, even if they ended up running 20 minutes (2005).
The VO2max test is one in which participants do not have an exact finish
distance or time, so it is likely that this degree of uncertainty could affect
the physiological parameters measured. The study also points to the
--- PAGE 125 ---
importance of feedback and anticipation and that it can affect
physiological variables.
One final theoretical problem is the question of why variation exists
based on exercise testing mode (Basset & Boulay, 2000). A runner tested
running versus another modality such as cycling will have different
VO2max values. There is great individual variation too, between 0 and
13% in the aforementioned study. If we recognize that regardless of
exercise the oxygen cascade from the air through delivery via Cardiac
Output is central adaptations and should not be different between the
exercise modes, then the change in VO2max must either happen on the
muscular level or it is regulated via muscle recruitment. This would
explain why elite cyclists reach higher percentages of treadmill VO2max
when testing cycling VO2max compared to lower level cyclists (Basset &
Boulay, 2000). Lastly, the fact that muscle mass activation seems to be the
major reason for variations in VO2max among a whole variety of testing
methods shows that muscle activation may play a significant role in
determining VO2max, at least to a certain point (Dalleck et al., 2004).
Considering this new theory of fatigue, and the fact that the
requirement used for reaching VO2max does not occur in many subjects,
the use of VO2max as a testing parameter should be called into question.
In addition, if VO2max is regulated, then the question arises if it even
accurately reflects cardio-respiratory endurance. If we accept this to be
true, then using VO2max and percentages of VO2max for training might
not give the training response that we think it does.
 
 
Efficacy of Basing Training Paces Off of
VO2max
With the rise of VO2max research, training systems developed
based on the parameter in two ways. First, training at the speeds that elicit
VO2max has become the magic training intensity, which supposedly
elicits the most improvements. Secondly, training at percentages of
VO2max has become en vogue as a way to quantify training intensity.
--- PAGE 126 ---
          In regards to training at VO2max, this arose because of a
review of research that showed that the largest improvements in VO2max
occurred when training at an intensity that corresponded with the
parameter, regardless of the duration of the exercise (Wenger & Bell,
1986). This finding was subsequently used to demonstrate that training at
VO2max was the best intensity for improving endurance in all groups of
people. There are two problems with this conclusion. First, the study’s
findings are generalized to all groups, even though, as we will talk about
later, VO2max does not improve in well-trained individuals. Second,
VO2max and endurance performance are used almost synonymously,
which is not true; as discussed earlier VO2max may not even measure
cardio-respiratory endurance and is certainly not the only factor in
endurance performance.
          Despite these concerns, training at VO2max has risen to
prominence. In looking at the research, there are countless studies and
reviews that focus on training at this intensity (Midgley et al., 2006). It
has gone so far that maximizing the time spent at VO2max during a
training session has garnered much attention (Midgley et al., 2006).
Researchers have studied the various interval-training programs with the
sole goal of seeing how much time at VO2max each subject spent during
the training, which in itself is interesting because it shows the emphasis on
the parameter instead of performance. The thought is that time spent at
VO2max is the stimulus needed to improve VO2max. However, this
theory has not been substantiated by research. For instance, in a study by
Billat after four weeks of training using an interval program designed to
elicit time at VO2max, VO2max and, more importantly, performance did
not improve (1999). In addition, even in untrained people, the original
review by Wenger and Bell stated that improvements in VO2max at high
intensities were not dependent on the volume of training (1986). Despite
these facts, researchers continue to press on with the idea that time spent
at VO2max is the key ingredient for improved endurance, even though no
research backs up this theory.
Using %VO2max and %vVO2max to quantify intensity is an
accepted practice in research and is used in many training programs, such
as those prescribed by Jack Daniels and Joe Vigil (Vigil, Daniels, 2005).
The problem with this approach is that each individual will have a wide
--- PAGE 127 ---
range of adaptation, even if training at the same percentage of VO2max.
This occurs due to differences in the individual’s physiology. For instance,
lactate threshold can occur at a wide range of %VO2max, even in trained
individuals (Brooks and Fahey, 2004). As an example, if two trained
runners both performed at a fixed intensity at 80% VO2max, one can be
below lactate threshold and one above. This would substantially impact
the energetics of the workout, as can be seen in a study that showed there
was a 40-fold range for increases in lactate levels at 70% VO2max among
individuals (Vollaard et al., 2009). In a recent study by Scharhag-
Rosenberger they tested whether exercising at the same %VO2max
resulted in similar metabolic strain. They found large individual variance
in the lactate response at the fixed intensity, even if groups were matched
for similar VO2max values. This led them to conclude that the use of
percent VO2max values for training or research should not be used if the
goal is to have similar metabolic strain by the exercisers.
 In addition to lactate differences, factors such as the individual’s
substrate use, fiber type, and other physiological variables will all vary
considerably at a fixed percent of VO2max. This phenomenon was
demonstrated in a study by Vollaard (2009). The study showed that while
on average improvements were seen in a variety of endurance parameters
after six weeks of endurance training, the individuality of the response
was widespread with some showing even negative responses to the
training, even though the training was at the same 70%VO2max intensity
for all subjects (Vollaard et al., 2009). The study showed that there was a
wide range of adaptation in maximal and sub maximal tests including
VO2 parameters, muscle enzyme activity, and metabolite levels. An
interesting finding in the study is that low responders for an increased
VO2max were not low responders in other parameters. The change in
VO2max did not correlate with the change in performance on a time trial,
which is a significant finding demonstrating that perhaps more attention
should be paid to changing performance instead of manipulating
physiological parameters such as VO2max. One has to question the
training recommendations based on training designed at improving
parameters such as VO2max, with the assumption being that performance
will improve because of it, when studies show that change in VO2max are
often not linked with a change in performance. This phenomenon of
--- PAGE 128 ---
varied response is not new and can be seen in a wide array of training
situations, such as altitude training for example (Chapman et al., 1998).
Knowing the wide variance in adaptation that can occur when
training at a fixed percent of VO2max, its use has to be called into
question. In fact, Vollard questioned the use of %VO2max as a way to
standardize intensity and suggested standardization on parameters that
more directly affect power output (2009). These findings combined with
those by Scharhag-Rosenberger et al. suggest that the use of %VO2max
should be eliminated if the goal is to standardize intensity. One has to
really wonder about training programs that use %VO2max to prescribe
training as what adaptations will take place are almost a crapshoot. This
does not seem to be a scientific way to train, as it is portrayed. In practical
terms for trained distance runners, it probably makes more sense to
standardize paces in relation to their recent race performances or based on
percentages of goal race pace in well-trained runners.
 
Should We Train to Improve
VO2max?
As mentioned previously, studies have shown that training at
VO2max elicits the most improvement in VO2max. This has been used as
reasoning for training at VO2max because, as previously discussed,
VO2max is the traditional measurement for endurance. The logic is that if
VO2max is increased, endurance performance increases. This is not the
case. In addition, the question arises if VO2max actually improves in
well-trained runners? It doesn’t.
Showing the separation of VO2max and performance, the Vollaard
study found that the change in VO2max was not related to the change in
time trial performance (2009). Other studies demonstrate improved
performances without changes in VO2max (Daniels et al. 1978). Also,
studies show that VO2max can improve without changes in performance,
which is seen in a study by Smith that showed improvements in VO2max
by 5.0% without an improvement in performance over either 3,000m or
5,000m (2003).  In addition, in looking at long-term changes in
--- PAGE 129 ---
performance in elite athletes, changes in performance occur without
subsequent changes in VO2max.
In highly trained athletes, many studies have shown that VO2max
does not change, even with performance improvements. In one of the only
studies done on a large group (33) of elite runners, Arrese tracked changes
in VO2max across three years. Performance improved by an average of
1.77% in men and 0.69% in women, with VO2max remaining essentially
unchanged (~76.56 vs. ~76.42 in men, and ~70.31 vs. ~70.05 in women)
(Legaz Arrese et al., 2005). This points to improved performance in elite
runners without changes in VO2max. Furthermore, it has been shown that
among homogenous groups, such as well-trained runners, VO2max does
not correlate well with performance and cannot be used to distinguish
which runners are faster (Legaz-Arrese et al., 2007).
Further evidence can be seen in two case studies on elite runners. In
a study on a female Olympic level runner, Jones showed that while the
athlete’s 3,000m time improved by 46 seconds, her VO2max decreased
from 72 ml/kg/min down to 66 ml/kg/min (Jones, 1998). Another study by
Jones, this one on the current women’s marathon world record holder,
found that while VO2max varied some based on the time of testing, it was
essentially stable at 70 mL · kg–1 · min–1 from 1992 to 2003 (Jones,
2006). The fact that Radcliffe’s Vo2max was essentially stable despite her
training volume and intensity increasing substantially is intriguing. Her
training increased from a modest 25-30 miles per week (and her VO2max
was already 72 at the time) to 120-160 miles per week. The fact that
VO2max did not change despite this massive increase in volume and
intensity shows the short time course of changes in VO2max. Most
importantly, Radcliffe’s performance improved dramatically during that
time period.
The rapid change in VO2max can even be seen in untrained
individuals. In a study by Smith and Donnell, they evaluated the changes
in VO2max over a 36-week training period (1984). VO2max substantially
increased by 13.6%, but all of those gains were seen in the first 24 weeks
of the study with no further increases during the final 12 weeks. Similarly
in a study by Daniels, in untrained subjects VO2max increased during the
first 4 weeks of training but did not increase after that even with a further
increase of training, despite continued improvements in performance
--- PAGE 130 ---
(1978). Given the evidence that VO2max does not change in elite runners
and does not correlate with performance, training focused on improving
VO2max does not seem like a logical idea for well-trained runners.
Vollaard may have put it best when they came to the conclusion that
“Moreover, we demonstrate that VO2max and aerobic performance
associate with distinct and separate physiological and biochemical
endpoints, suggesting that proposed models for the determinants of
endurance performance may need to be revisited (2009, pg. 1483)”. Their
recognition that aerobic performance and VO2max are not direct equals or
even well linked is a step in the right direction and needs to be
acknowledged to a much greater degree. Combining these findings with
Noakes’ CGM creates a situation where VO2max may not be measuring
what we think it is. Adding the facts that using %VO2max to classify
training results in a wide range of adaptations and that changes in
VO2max do not occur in trained athletes, one has to question basing entire
training programs on VO2max. The point isn’t to question the importance
of oxygen or the aerobic system but instead to show that VO2max does a
poor job of representing the aerobic contribution
The bottom line question that needs to be asked is why is so much
of training focused on a variable that does not change in well-trained
athletes, barely changes in moderately trained athletes, levels off after a
short period of time, and does not even correlate well with performance?
Does this sound like a variable that we should be basing all of our training
off of?
 
--- PAGE 131 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 133 ---
6

--- PAGE 134 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 135 ---
Lactate, Acid, and Other By-
Products
"You build the best possible story from the information available to you,
and if it is a good story, you believe it. Paradoxically, it is easier to
construct a coherent story when you know little, when there are fewer
pieces to fit into the puzzle. Our comforting conviction that the world
makes sense rests on a secure foundation: our almost unlimited ability to
ignore our ignorance." Daniel Kahneman
 
For decades the main culprit of fatigue and the nemesis of all
athletes was a foe called lactic acid. Unfortunately, for decades we were
dead wrong. Instead, lactic acid, more correctly termed lactate, has given
way to the idea that the buildup of other products could potentially cause
fatigue. If you recall the chapter on fatigue, this is the buildup theory. The
revelation that lactate is not the enemy doesn’t mean that our training
needs to be thrown out or that all of the research based on lactate should
be banished. While lactate does not directly cause fatigue, it highly
correlates with it, so that as fatigue increases lactate increases. This is
partially due to the linear relationship between by-products such as H+
increases and lactate increases. One of the keys to running performance is
to delay the buildup of these accompanying products. If the rate of
accumulation of those products can be decreased, fatigue can be delayed.
So while lactate is not the culprit, it corresponds with the buildup of by-
products that can cause fatigue. Given the vast amount of research done
on lactate, we’ll delve into what causes lactate buildup and what can be
improved to delay its buildup. First, let’s look at how the buildup of such
products affects performance.
Coaches commonly use workouts to enhance lactate tolerance or the
lactate threshold. While the traditional method of hard intervals for the
former and tempo runs for the latter has merit, knowing the underlying
mechanisms of this process will help a coach better design workouts to
enhance those variables. For instance, in the training section, you will
--- PAGE 136 ---
learn about a progression of workouts designed to improve threshold from
the knowledge of how the lactate threshold develops.
 
 
Buffering Capacity and Dealing with Acidosis
In events that are run at speeds that require more energy than the
aerobic system can provide, anaerobic energy sources must take up the
slack. As previously mentioned, middle distance events have a significant
anaerobic component. Due to this anaerobic component, certain products
will accumulate in the body, potentially causing fatigue. Previous studies
have demonstrated that an increase in H+, which is a proton that
dissociates from lactate and would decrease the pH, may impair muscle
contractility (Mainwood & Renaud, 1985).
While the previously accepted notion that lactate played a direct role
in fatigue, essentially acting as a “poison” to the muscles, has been
disproven, it does not discount the entire acidosis concept of fatigue
(Noakes, 2007). While lactate itself may not cause fatigue, it corresponds
with other products in the body that may contribute to fatigue, thus lactate
can still be used in studies as a marker of fatigue. For instance, as
mentioned already, an increase in circulating blood lactate corresponds
well with a decrease in pH and an increase in H+. An increase in H+ has
been shown to reduce the shortening speed of a muscle fiber, while a
reduction in pH impairs Ca2++ reuptake in the Sarcoplasmic Reticulum
and may inhibit phosphofructokinase (PFK) (Hargreaves & Spriett, 2006;
Brooks et al. 2004). In addition, a decrease in pH could stimulate pain
receptors (Brooks et al., 2004). All of these actions could potentially cause
fatigue.
The ability of the muscle to buffer the H+ could potentially delay
fatigue. As mentioned above, a rise in H+ concentration causes many
processes that could potentially lead to fatigue. In particular, its inhibitory
effect on PFK would impact ATP production through Glycolysis. Training
has been shown to increase buffering capacity in both recreational and
well-trained athletes (Laursen & Jenkins, 2002). Furthermore, in one
study, the buffering capacity of 6 elite cyclists was found to be
significantly related to their performance in a 40km time trial (Weston et
--- PAGE 137 ---
al., 1996). This demonstrates the importance of dealing with by-products
and buffering capacity when it comes to performance. Due to the impact
of acidosis on energy production and performance, much of the coaching
and scientific literature focuses on delaying this process. Of particular
interest is the concept of the lactate threshold.
 
The Lactate Threshold
In this book, Lactate Threshold (LT) is defined as the fastest running
speed at which blood lactate levels remain in a relative steady state. Or
stated in another way, it is the fastest speed in which lactate production
and clearance are in equilibrium. LT has been given many different names,
from Maximum Lactate Steady State (MaxLass) to Anaerobic Threshold,
and has been given many different definitions based on fixed lactate
readings and extrapolation from a lactate curve. Originally, LT was
defined as a fixed lactate reading at 4.0 mmol/L, but more recent research
has shown that lactate levels at LT can vary as much as 6 mmol/L,
between 2 and 8 mmol/L (Beneke, 2000). In addition, LT can be expressed
as a percentage of VO2max.
The lactate threshold is dependent on many factors relating to the
production and clearance of lactate. This interaction is what governs the
amount of lactate in the blood and ultimately the LT (Billat et al., 2003).
Lactate production within the individual fibers occurs via Glycolysis. At
the end of Glycolysis, pyruvate is formed, which can go one of two routes:
it can be converted into lactate via the enzyme Lactate Dehydrogenize
(LDH) or into acetyl-CoA via PDH and enter the mitochondria to be used
in the Krebs cycle and produce energy aerobically. Whether Pyruvate is
converted to acetyl-CoA and enters the mitochondria or is converted to
Lactate depends on several factors, including LDH and PDH enzyme
concentration and activity (Hargereaves 2006). Contrary to popular belief,
conversion to lactate occurs even when in the presence of adequate
oxygen.
Path of Lactate
--- PAGE 138 ---
 
It is important to note that we are measuring blood lactate when
defining LT, not muscle lactate. That means that LT is dependent not only
on how much lactate a muscle produces but how much actually makes it
into the bloodstream. When lactate is produced it can stay in the muscle,
travel to adjacent muscle fibers, move into the interstitial space between
muscles, or travel to the bloodstream. How much travels to the blood is
partially dependent on both the difference between lactate levels in the
blood and muscle and on the lactate transporter activity, which will be
covered later. Lactate appearance in the blood also depends on exercise
intensity and the amount and type of muscle mass activated. Greater
intensity means a greater reliance on Glycolysis without as much aerobic
respiration taking place. Also, the more intense an effort is, the greater the
amount of Fast Twitch fibers that are recruited, and because of their
characteristics, they are more likely to produce lactate.
On the other side of the coin is lactate removal, which occurs via
several mechanisms. Within the muscle cell itself, lactate can be used as
fuel by being taken up and oxidized by the mitochondria. Therefore lactate
can be consumed by the muscle fiber, or it can be transported to adjacent
fibers to be used. Additionally, it can be transported to interstitial spaces
(the space surrounding/between muscle cells). In these instances, lactate
produced in the muscle would not increase the blood lactate levels as it
would either be consumed by the producing muscle or adjacent fibers, or
it would be sent to interstitial spaces.
Lactate that makes it to the bloodstream can be removed in several
ways. Muscle fibers that are on the Slow Twitch side of the muscle fiber
spectrum can act as consuming fibers that take the lactate from the blood
and use it as an energy source. Muscle fibers that are not taxed to a high
--- PAGE 139 ---
degree also are used to take up lactate from the bloodstream. In addition,
the heart, brain, and liver all play an active role in clearing lactate from
the blood. The heart and brain use lactate as a fuel source, while the liver,
through the Cori cycle, acts to convert lactate to pyruvate and then
ultimately the fuel source glucose. This process has been termed the
lactate shuttle, in which lactate is produced in a muscle then sent through
the bloodstream where it can be taken up and used as a fuel source by
muscle fibers or other tissues and organs. It has been theorized that this is
one of the body’s way of transporting energy stores to different muscles as
glycogen in its stored form cannot be transported.
 
 
Muscle Fiber Characteristics
 Muscle fiber type also plays a role in lactate production and
ultimately LT. Fast Twitch muscle fibers are more likely to produce lactate
due to the individual characteristics of the fiber that make it prefer
Glycolysis, such as having a larger amount of Glycolytic enzymes (Bishop
et al., 2000). In addition, having fewer mitochondria, myoglobin, and
greater LDH activity makes it where the pyruvate is more likely to go the
route of lactate. Similarly, for Slow Twitch fibers, mitochondria
concentration plays a role in enhancing the LT (Billat et al., 2003).
An increase in mitochondria allows for more pyruvate to be
converted to acetyl-CoA and enter the mitochondria. Because of these
factors, the fiber type of the athlete and mitochondria concentration will
help determine the amount of lactate produced and the LT. Not only does
--- PAGE 140 ---
an increase in mitochondria size cause a decrease in lactate, but an
increase in mitochondrial enzymes decreases lactate too (Bassett &
Howley, 2000). This is likely due to an increase of the pyruvate that is
converted to Acetyl-CoA instead of lactate or an increased ability for
lactate oxidation. Going beyond just changes in lactate concentration,
several studies have established a relationship between mitochondrial
enzyme activity and the LT (Coyle, 1995). Lastly, a study on detraining
found that the drop in LT that occurred closely mirrored the drop in
mitochondrial enzyme activity (Coyle, 1985). These results show the close
relationship between lactate levels and mitochondrial enzyme levels.
 
Monocarboxylate Transporters
Lactate clearance occurs via the lactate shuttle. Lactate produced in
a muscle fiber can be used as a fuel source by several different organs;
including being shuttled to adjacent muscle fibers, the liver, cardiac
muscle, and other muscles via the bloodstream (Stallknecht et al., 1998).
This shuttle system allows for the transport of an energy source, which is
important because stored glycogen in a muscle fiber cannot be converted
back into glucose to be transported. Lactate transport proteins mediate this
transport.
So far, two different primary lactate transporters have been found
that help facilitates transport into and out of the muscle cell.
Monocarboxylate 1 (MCT 1) has a high affinity for lactate and is
primarily found in ST muscle fibers. It is believed that MCT1 has a role in
the oxidation of lactate and therefore the transport of lactate into the cell
(Billat et al., 2003; Hargereaves, 2006). For this reason, MCT1 quantity
has been found to correlate with endurance performance (Bentley et al.,
2009). MCT4, another transporter protein, is found primarily in FT fibers.
It has a lower affinity for lactate and is believed to have a role in lactate
transport out of the muscle cell (Billat et al., 2003; Hargereaves 2006).
Both of the MCT types increase with training, thus showing that lactate
dynamics can be improved.
--- PAGE 141 ---
Maximum Lactate Steady State
Lactate steady states are generally only considered to happen during
longer duration running. In particular, it is often cited that the fastest speed
that one can run while keeping lactate readings steady is a speed that a
runner can hold for about one hour (Billat et al. 2003; Daniels, 2005).
However, field data provided by Italian coach Renato Canova during a
simulated 5k and 10k race in elite Kenyan athletes, one of which is a
world record holder, suggests that elite runners may be able to run at a
lactate steady state in the middle kilometers of a 5k or 10k, which take
~13 and ~27 minutes for these athletes to complete. This goes against
conventional wisdom as it is generally accepted that blood lactate levels
increase steadily throughout the race. This may be true for most athletes,
but if the elite African runners have this ability to run at a steady state in
the middle of the 5k or 10k race this could partially explain their
dominance.
 In addition, there was a relationship between the ability to increase
speed in the final kilometer and the ability to increase lactate by a large
degree in the final kilometer. Essentially the athletes were able to run at a
moderate amount of lactate during the middle of the race and then during
the final stretch of the race increase their speed and lactate levels to a large
degree. Perhaps this gap between lactate during the middle of the race and
--- PAGE 142 ---
the ending lactate explains the ability to kick at the end of a race. The
African runners are notorious for being able to finish very fast last laps in
both championship and fast races. Many times their last lap times are very
close to their self-reported fastest times they can run one lap fresh. This
phenomenon is one that needs to be explored in a controlled environment.
Lactate Testing
The best way to measure LT is up for debate (Billat et al., 2003).
Traditionally, the lactate test has consisted of a series of ~5min steps that
gradually increase in pace. However, research is unclear on what the best
testing method is, and if using a step test, how long each step should be
and how much velocity should be increased with each step. It all comes
down to how much time is required to reach a reasonable degree of steady
state. This has led some researchers to suggest long stages of up to 20min
(Billat et al., 2003). However, the problem with this suggestion is that it is
not practical, and if one does not have a reasonable approximation of the
velocity of the individuals LT, then it could take many long stages to find
a LT.
At best, the tests used to find a true lactate threshold are essentially
educated guesses. The only true way to find a lactate threshold (or Max
Lass) is to run at a constant speed for around 20-30min and take blood
lactate samples and make sure there is very little increase in lactate from
start to finish. Then, do this again at a faster pace. You have to keep doing
this until you find the fastest pace that you can maintain without an
--- PAGE 143 ---
increase in blood lactate. Practically, it’s pretty much worthless and too
time-consuming. So we throw that idea out the window. Instead, scientists
have developed all sorts of ways to guess what the LT is based on a lactate
curve. Some ways are more accurate than others, but most involve a step
test. For example, a common test is to run 5x mile with 1-2min rest,
starting at an easy/moderate speed and increasing speed by 15sec per mile
or so. For example, running 5:35, 5:20, 5:05, 4:50, and 4:35 for someone
who has a threshold of around 4:55-5:00. This gives you a lactate level for
each speed, which is then plotted on a speed vs. lactate level graph. A
variety of methods are used to determine where lactate threshold is, but
they all essentially look at what speed lactate readings start to increase
significantly over baseline. Some involve simply looking and guessing
while others involve mathematical formulas, but the bottom line is all are
educated guesses.
Since we’ve established that there is a problem with finding the
lactate threshold, let’s look at the next problem with lactate threshold
research. That would be the problem of knowing what that nice little
lactate curve actually means. The traditional way to read a curve is that a
shift to the right in the curve means a better LT, or better endurance, and a
shift to the left means deteriorating endurance. The problem with that idea
is it is too simplistic. According to Jan Olbrecht, who outlines lactate
testing in his excellent book The Science of Winning, there are two
opposing forces that mainly act upon the lactate curve. These opposing
forces are the aerobic and anaerobic capacity. Aerobic capacity is
essentially how well the aerobic system functions to minimize lactate
levels. If you recall the previous section on lactate dynamics, lactate can
be minimized via several mechanisms. First, when pyruvate is formed, it
can be converted to acetyl-CoA and be used to produce ATP aerobically,
thus minimizing the amount of pyruvate that becomes lactate. Also, lactate
that is produced in the muscle can be taken up and used aerobically by
adjacent muscles or other tissues, and lactate that is in the bloodstream can
be taken up by Slow Twitch muscle fibers to be used as fuel aerobically.
Thus aerobic capacity can be changed based on any improvements that
enhance these processes, such as increased aerobic enzymes,
mitochondria, or oxygen delivery.
--- PAGE 144 ---
In essence, Anaerobic Capacity refers to the maximum amount of
pyruvate that can be produced. An increase in Glycolytic capacity through
improvements such as increases in Glycolytic enzymes is one example.
The theory is that maximum pyruvate production impacts the LT because
if more pyruvate is produced without a change in the amount that can be
turned into Acetyl-CoA (or aerobic ability), then more pyruvate
automatically gets converted to lactate. Therefore a change in LT can
occur without any change in aerobic abilities.
These two factors interact to produce the lactate curve. An increase
in anaerobic capacity would shift the curve to the left (meaning more
lactate produced at each speed), while an increase in aerobic capacity
would shift the curve to the right (meaning less lactate produced at each
speed). The strength of each of these opposing forces determines where
the curve ends up. While this view is still a simplistic actualization, it
acknowledges the anaerobic contribution to the lactate curve and provides
a better model for looking at the lactate curve. That is an important point
because traditionally all changes in the lactate curve have been thought to
be because of changes in aerobic abilities. This model by Olbrecht shows
that changes in the curve depend on the push and pull of two factors, not
just one. You can clearly see that not only do aerobic abilities, such as how
much pyruvate gets converted to lactate or how much lactate can be used
by other muscles or organs, play a role, but so do anaerobic abilities such
as how much pyruvate is produced. Shown on the following page is a
simple diagram of this model.
--- PAGE 145 ---
 
Now that we have this model, what does it mean and how do we use
it? Starting at the top of the diagram, the first thing that can be affected is
pyruvate production. From this point forward, I will refer to maximum
pyruvate production as Anaerobic Capacity. Aerobic Capacity can be seen
in the amount of pyruvate that is taken up by the mitochondria and leads
to aerobic energy.
Looking at these two capacities, it can be seen how the model works
in diagnosing training. In order to increase the energy available, we can
increase the Anaerobic Capacity. That will allow the athlete to produce
more pyruvate. However, if the aerobic capacity stays the same, then this
means more lactate will be produced at that effort level. If we increase the
aerobic capacity, then we can see that more of that pyruvate is shuttled
into the mitochondria resulting in aerobic energy increase and less lactate
at the given effort. This model shows lactate has an interaction with both
the anaerobic capacity and the aerobic capacity, not just the aerobic
capacity, which is widely recognized as the only source in traditional
training models.
The question then becomes how do we analyze the LT curve to see
if it was a change in aerobic or anaerobic capacity that caused a change in
the LT? While there is no simple foolproof way, the use of an anaerobic
capacity test makes everything a bit clearer. An anaerobic capacity test
--- PAGE 146 ---
consists of running an all-out 400-600m and taking lactate readings every
2-3min afterward until a maximum reading occurs. This usually occurs
within 5-9 minutes following a max test. Combining the maximum lactate
number and the speed of your time trial, you get a good baseline idea of
your anaerobic capacity. The higher the lactate and faster the speed, the
higher the anaerobic capacity is. A decrease in maximum lactate levels
and speed shows a decrease in anaerobic capacity.
Once you have this information, do a traditional LT test to get a
lactate curve. My suggestion would be 5x5minutes with 60-90 seconds
between repeats, starting at a moderate speed and increasing the speed by
10-15sec per mile until the last two repeats are faster than LT. Plot the
results in a speed versus lactate graph to get a curve. The first test serves
as a baseline. The real information comes when you repeat this test in a
month or two. To analyze it, first look to see if there was a change in the
lactate curve to see if it shifted left or right. Next, look at the anaerobic
capacity to see if it changed. Remember that an increase in anaerobic
capacity shifts the curve to the left, while a decrease shifts the curve to the
right. The degree to which each capacity changes also matters in that a
moderate increase in anaerobic capacity with a stronger increase in
aerobic capacity would result in the lactate curve moving slightly to the
right. The interaction is what matters. Below is an example interpretation:
 
--- PAGE 147 ---
In the above graph, we have three separate lactate tests performed.
The first test provides a baseline for the subsequent tests. In test two, it
can be seen that lactate levels are essentially the same throughout, with a
very slight difference only at the fastest speed. In the traditional way of
evaluating the test, these two tests would give the same LT and the
conclusion would be that LT did not improve so the training was
ineffective. However, note that the max lactate increased dramatically
from 13.1 to 15.9mmol. We can conclude that since anaerobic capacity
improved by so much thereby pulling the curve leftwards, the aerobic
capacity must have improved by a similar amount since the lactate levels
did not change. Thus the conclusion is that anaerobic and aerobic
capacities were both improved and the training was effective if that was
the goal.
Next, test 3 shows the lactate levels shifted upwards and left, as
more lactate was produced at each intensity. If we look at the maximum
lactate, it shows a very similar number to the previous test so the
anaerobic capacity did not change. Therefore, since the lactate levels
increased without a change in anaerobic capacity, it must be concluded
that the aerobic capacity deteriorated. This is just one example of how
lactate curve analysis can be done using this new model. The takeaway
message is that lactate levels reflect a balance of opposing aerobic and
anaerobic forces.
 

--- PAGE 148 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 150 ---
7

--- PAGE 151 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 152 ---
Efficiency
“The search for understanding, wherever it roams, is a search for
better simplifications. Simplifications which explain more and distort
less…All human understanding is based on simplifications of more
complex realities.” Bill James
 
While most of the time the focus is on capacities, or how big the
engine is, the real key is often how efficient a runner is. Coaches and
scientists often talk about the importance of efficiency, but what it actually
is and how to improve it is not well understood. Instead of one catchall
term, there are actually several types of efficiency including metabolic,
neural, and biomechanical. These three types of efficiencies combine to
create total efficiency. Total efficiency is useless unless the components
that make it up are understood. By understanding the three different types
of efficiency, a runner can find and improve their particular weakness.
Before delving into the different types of efficiency and how they can be
improved, let’s look at the measurement commonly used for total
efficiency.
 
The Measurement: Running Economy
The last of the traditional big three physiological parameters for
running performance is Running Economy (RE). Running Economy is the
measurement used to classify total efficiency in research. The
measurement uses oxygen intake to represent energy use and is commonly
defined by how much oxygen it takes to cover a given distance at a fixed
speed (Saunders et al. 2004). RE significantly correlates with performance
and has been used in conjunction with other factors as a model to explain
running performance. In a study on well-trained runners (VO2max of
~72), Conley and Krahenbuhl showed that RE could explain 65% of the
variation in race performance among the group of 12 runners (Conley et
al., 1980). While the problems with the measurement of RE itself will be
discussed later, it is often forgotten in the research that RE is a measure of
gross efficiency, meaning that it is the result of both internal and external
components, so that mechanical, neural, and metabolic efficiency play a
--- PAGE 153 ---
role. The RE measurement simply reflects a combination of these three
efficiency components.
Biomechanical efficiency refers to the mechanical cost of running
and includes such factors as energy storage and how wasteful the
movement pattern is. Neural efficiency can be defined as an improvement
in the communication between the nervous system and the muscles
themselves. As an example, an improvement in neural efficiency could
occur via more refined motor programming. Lastly, metabolic efficiency
refers to factors that impact the production of energy for the muscles to
use, such as fuel source or oxygen delivery. This concept of multiple types
of efficiency is often overlooked, as it is possible to become more efficient
in one area yet have total RE be negatively affected because of a larger
decrease in another aspect of efficiency. Thus it is a balancing act to
maximize total efficiency. The measure itself of gross efficiency may be
flawed as it tries to integrate too many variables based on oxygen
consumption, but the idea that efficiency is important is correct.  Let’s
look at some of the components that affect running economy.
 
Biomechanical Efficiency
Biomechanical efficiency refers to anything that impacts the
mechanical cost of running. If you think back to the chapter on how
running happens, you’ll recall that active and passive dynamics combine
to provide the energy needed for movement. Biomechanical efficiency is
mainly concerned with the passive dynamics side, while the active side,
which relies on muscle contraction for movement is accounted for in
metabolic and neural efficiency. There are several factors that contribute
to biomechanical efficiency. If these factors are optimized then less energy
is required to cover a given distance. They include elastic energy storage
and return, the mechanics of the stride itself, how the foot lands, and the
structure of the runner.
 
Stretch Shortening Cycle and Elastic Energy
Return
--- PAGE 154 ---
While the most efficient way to run biomechanically is discussed in a
later chapter, there are several mechanisms that improve biomechanical
efficiency, one of the most important being the Stretch Shortening Cycle
(SSC). The SSC occurs when a muscle is actively stretched and then
immediately contracts. During the pre-stretch portion, energy is stored in
the series elastic components of the muscle, and then the energy is
released during the contraction part. Essentially it is a spring-like
mechanism with storage and release of energy greater than if just
contraction took place. The amount of elastic energy return is dependent
on several factors including the length and speed of the stretch, the
stiffness of the muscle, and the time between the stretch and the
subsequent contraction (Saunders et al., 2004).
In general, a stiffer muscle will store more energy than a loose
muscle, although there is likely an optimal stiffness. This idea can be
conceptualized by thinking of a very loose rubber band compared to a
very tight rubber band. If the tight rubber band is stretched it stores a
much larger amount of energy and will fly much further if let go than if a
loose band is stretched and let go. In addition, the longer the delay
between the stretch and the subsequent contraction the more energy
dissipates. Therefore the SSC works best when a stiff muscle is rapidly
stretched and contracted with little time in between. A good example of
this is the calf muscle upon landing and subsequent toe off during running
or the extension of the hip while sprinting. Evidence of the impact of the
SSC on RE can be seen by the fact that muscle stiffness strongly
correlates with RE (Dalleau et al., 1998). The fact that muscle and tendon
stiffness is one factor that can improve RE leads to the question “is an
increase in flexibility is such a good thing?“ Contrary to popular belief, a
stiffer muscle is more efficient during running than a flexible one.
The stiffness of the muscle-tendon unit is dependent on several
factors including active characteristics such as the muscle
concentric/eccentric contraction state and passive characteristics such as
the length and condition of the muscle, tendon, and fascia during impact.
Demonstrating the impact of muscle stiffness, Kyrolaine found that stiffer
muscles surrounding the ankle and knee created an increased SSC
response, which resulted in greater force on the subsequent push off
(2001). The keys to obtaining optimal stiffness and energy return are to
--- PAGE 155 ---
put the body in optimal position upon impact, training the muscle and
tendon to be able to absorb and utilize the forces, and training to pre-
activate the muscles.
Pre-activation of the muscles before landing is a way to actively
manipulate stiffness of the system, resulting in greater storage of elastic
energy. Dalleau demonstrated this in showing that the energy cost of
running was related to the stiffness of the lower leg (1998). Pre-activation
occurs as the muscles in the lower leg prepare for impact. This is done to
adjust for the impact forces, essentially acting as an internal cushioning
mechanism, and to decrease the stress caused by muscular vibration. This
pre-activation, or muscle tuning, can be thought of as the body’s way to
prepare for landing. If we are running on soft sand versus hard concrete,
the degree of stiffness in the muscle just before landing will change.
In addition to the muscles themselves contributing to energy storage
and release, the tendons also play a role. During impact such as the
braking or contact phase of running, tendons store energy and then
subsequently release that energy via recoil during the take-off phase of
running. The tendons and muscle complexes essentially act as a spring,
storing energy upon ground strike and releasing energy as the runner nears
take off.
 In a study by Ker, it was found that the Achilles tendon stores 35%
of its kinetic energy, while tendons that are in the arch of the foot store
17% (1987). It has been estimated that without the two aforementioned
mechanisms of storage and release of elastic energy, the VO2 required
would be 30-40% higher (Saunders et al., 2004). To properly utilize these
elastic mechanisms, the body has to be in optimal position
biomechanically and the tendons have to be trained to utilize the forces.
Rapid movements such as sprinting or plyometrics will train the tendons
to be better able to utilize the energy.
Additionally, the use of these elastic energy systems depends greatly
on a person’s biomechanics. Running in a certain way can potentially
elicit a greater elastic storage and return, as it will put the muscles and
tendons in a better position to be able to store and use energy. For
example, forefoot running (or barefoot running) has been shown to
improve RE when compared to heel striking with shoes in certain
populations (Squadrone & Gallozzi, 2009). One possible explanation is
--- PAGE 156 ---
that forefoot running results in the runner landing with the ankle more
plantar flexed; this may allow the subsequent stretch reflex on the calf and
Achilles-calf complex to utilize more elastic energy than landing in a
dorsiflexed position at heel strike where the calf complex is already in a
stretched position thus minimizing the SSC. Another possible explanation
put forth by Dr. Daniel Lieberman of Harvard is that forefoot striking
utilizes the elastic components of the arch of the foot more so than a heel
strike does. Lastly, in a heel strike, the ground contact time is longer as the
foot has to transition from the heel touching the ground to pushing off
with the ball of the foot. This lengthened ground contact means more time
between energy storage and release. Thus more energy likely dissipates
and is lost. Regardless of the explanation, it appears that a non-heel strike
would be beneficial to maximize efficiency if a runner is highly dependent
on elastic energy return. This is but one example of how the position of
the body impacts energy usage.
 
 
Stride Characteristics
 There are several biomechanical characteristics that impact the
efficiency of the running gait. One factor is individual stride length. Since
speed is equal to stride length x stride rate, optimizing and manipulating
those variables is important. In a study on fatigue during a marathon, it
was found that RE decreased in the later stages of the marathon partly due
to a decrease in stride length (Hausswirth). This leads to the question of
whether manipulating stride parameters can optimize RE. Evidence has
--- PAGE 157 ---
shown that runners are most efficient at their self-selected stride lengths
and that when made to run with shorter or faster stride lengths, RE was
worse (Cavanagh & Williams, 1982). However, it should be noted in the
Cavanagh study that not all runners self-selected their optimal stride
length. In another study, they found that 20% of their subjects selected
stride lengths that resulted in an elevated RE (Morgan et al., 1994). It is of
interest that all of these subjects were over striders. Similarly, in the
Cavanagh study, of the 10 subjects who did not select optimal stride
lengths, 7 were over striders. It has been hypothesized that overstriding
results in a reduction in the ability to use stored elastic energy. This
hypothesis was backed up by the findings of Kyrolaine who found that
increased braking force, which would occur in over striding, results in an
increased RE (2001). In regards to optimizing stride length, it appears that
it functions based on a U-shaped curve, where too short and too long of a
stride length for a given speed results in increased VO2, therefore
hampering RE (Morgan et al., 1994).
In addition to stride parameters such as length and frequency,
vertical oscillation contributes to RE. Excess vertical oscillation decreases
RE and is one of the factors that helps explain why long distance runners
are typically more economical at slower paces than middle distance
runners (Saunders et al., 2004). In fact, several studies have found that
runners are more efficient at running velocities at which they frequently
train (Jones & Carter, 2000). There are two important things to remember
with vertical oscillation that are sometimes missed. Remember, that it is
excess vertical oscillation that decreases RE, not vertical oscillation itself.
A certain amount of vertical lift will be needed to cover ground.
Additionally, vertical motion is needed to gain a higher amount of
potential energy. If we were to stay flat, the amount of potential energy to
be used elastically would decrease.
Tying into this idea, it should be noted that RE is measured at
slower speeds due to the need for a steady state in oxygen consumption
when doing the measuring. Since runners who focus on shorter events,
such as middle distance athletes, tend to have greater vertical oscillation, it
is likely that this is a more efficient way to run at faster speeds. A greater
vertical oscillation is needed to cover ground in the air and reach their
optimal stride length. Based on these two ideas, I would advise against
--- PAGE 158 ---
minimizing vertical oscillation and instead recommend finding the
optimal vertical component. It is not unlike the basic physics problem we
all got in high school to determine the optimal angle to shoot a cannon to
reach the farthest distance. Too great of an angle would result in a large
vertical component but very little distance covered. On the other hand, a
very small angle would result in a line drive shot that would again fall
short of maximum distance. The running stride is very similar in that we
need to come off the ground at an optimal angle to maximize stride length.
 
Foot Strike
Whether a runner should use a heel strike or a midfoot/forefoot
strike is often debated and it can play a role in biomechanical efficiency.
Williams and Cavanagh suggested that a heel strike is more economical
due to decreased muscle activation required to provide cushioning,
because heal strikers let the shoe do the cushioning (1982). However, it
has not been established if the muscles used to alter cushioning play a role
in fatigue during a race. Also, as previously mentioned a forefoot strike
potentially utilizes elastic storage and return to a much higher degree than
a heel strike thus negating the muscle activation consequences. Research
by Ardigo backed up the benefits of a forefoot strike, showing that a
forefoot strike results in a shorter ground contact time and time of
acceleration, both beneficial adaptations (1996). Given these facts,
forefoot or midfoot strike are likely to be more economical, especially at
faster speeds which require rapid force production and short ground
contact times, such as middle distance events, or even distance events at
the elite level.
It is likely that there will be individual differences in regards to foot
strike, but forefoot striking may be more efficient mechanically, and
perhaps, more importantly, may be needed for the increased force
production coupled with a short ground contact time that is seen in faster
running (Kyrolaine et al., 2001). Additionally, forefoot striking allows for
greater use of elastic energy storage and return from both the Achilles
tendon and the arch of the foot. Lieberman also found that a forefoot
strike allowed for more conversion of translational energy into rotational
energy (2010).
--- PAGE 159 ---
Looking at the foot strike characteristics of elite athletes may
provide some clues. Unfortunately, there are only a limited number of
research studies on the topic. Hasewage looked at foot strike at the 15km
mark in a Japanese half marathon (2007). In the study, out of the 283
runners, 74.9% were rear-foot strikers. The rest were mid-foot and
forefoot strikers. That leads many to conclude that rear-foot strike may be
the way to go. However, if we look at a couple of other factors the picture
gets a little cloudier. When you separate out the top 50, instead of using
the entire group, those who mid-foot or forefoot strike jumps from ~25%
to 38%. That significant difference showed that there was a tendency for
more mid/forefoot strikers to be faster.
If we look at ground contact time, there was a linear relationship
with the faster runners having less ground contact time and GC increasing
as runners got slower and slower. In addition, forefoot/mid-foot strikers
spent significantly less time on the ground than their heel strike
counterparts (183ms vs. 199ms). These findings led the researchers to
conclude:
 
“The percentage of RFS increases with the decreasing of
the running speed; conversely, the percentage of MFS increases
as the running speed increases. A shorter contact time and a
higher frequency of inversion at the foot contact might contribute
to higher running economy.”
 
However, the story is not complete. There are still two other factors
that one has to take into account when looking at this study. First off, the
video was taken at ~9.3mi into a 13.1mi race. In other words, it takes
place late in the race when fatigue has already set in. As fatigue sets in
more mid-foot and forefoot strikers become heel strikers. Thus, when you
look this deeply into a race, it could potentially skew the percentages.
Second, the study was done in a large Japanese road race. While
there were several elite Kenyans and other nationalities, of the top 283 the
vast majority were Japanese which is very significant. This means that
technically the results are only generalizable to Japanese runners. Why is
this significant? Because of how the Japanese have historically trained and
how they historically run. Due to the heavy emphasis on very high
--- PAGE 160 ---
mileage and to moving everyone to the longer distances (half marathon
and marathon) while neglecting the shorter distance races (1500,5k), the
running style of Japanese runners is very different from Americans,
Europeans, and even Africans. Similarly, the traditional ideas taught by
Japanese coaches at the time favored a running style that was more
flat/scoot around type running. One of my coaching mentors spent time
going to Japan educating Japanese coaches on running mechanics at
around the time of this study. We’ve spent many hours discussing what
their views were, what the runners were being taught, and how their
athletes were running, and his experiences confirm this idea.
Due to these factors, it’s impossible to take this study and generalize
it to anyone except Japanese runners. In addition, the study shows that
speed is correlated with both foot strike and ground contact time. In the
only other studies to look at foot strike in faster runners, Hayes and
Caplan evaluated foot strike during high-level 1500m races in Britain.
These studies are unpublished at the moment but were presented at the
European College of Sports Science meeting in 2009. They looked at foot
strike and ground contact time on each lap. This will not only give us an
idea on foot strike implications but also on how that changes with fatigue.
The conclusions that can be drawn based on the research about fatigue and
training are very interesting.
In the 1500m, the range of times was from 3:45 to 4:22 with the
average being 3:56. Once again, ground contact time was related to foot
strike. Forefoot strikers spent 161ms on the ground compared to 169ms
for mid-foot and 192ms for heel strikers. The difference between heel
strikers and the other two are pretty remarkable. What is interesting is that
ground contact increases on every lap.
Foot strike also changed based on lap. Initially, on lap 1, 34.6%
were forefoot striking, 46.2% mid-foot, and 19.2% heel striking. On lap 4
the picture changed slightly. More of the mid-foot strikers, in particular,
had switched to heel striking (heel striking increased to 27 %.) What all of
this means is that fatigue presumably caused a change in foot strike.
Before delving into the meaning of this, let’s look at the results of the
other study on 800m runners quickly.  Average time 1:55 (range: 1:47-
2:01)
--- PAGE 161 ---
What does this all mean? It’s hard to come to any firm conclusions,
but the possible implications are very interesting. In regards to foot strike,
there is a relationship between running speed and foot strike. Do all fast
runners forefoot strike? No, but there is a tendency for the faster runners
to forefoot/mid-foot strike more so than the slower runners.
Critiques of the fore/mid foot striking idea say that foot strike is a
function of only speed. While speed certainly plays a role in where you
strike to an extent, it’s unlikely that it plays as much of a role as people
make it out to. This means that someone is not going from a straight heel
strike while running easy to a forefoot strike while running 800m pace.
The previously mentioned Lieberman study provided the first evidence
showing that forefoot strikers struck forefoot regardless of condition.
Similarly, if we look at the data in the studies above, you can see that the
percentage of foot strike types is remarkably similar despite the significant
increase in average running speed between the events (from 63-64sec per
lap down to 57.5sec per lap). Even though these are different people
running each event, if foot strike were solely a function of speed, like
many have claimed, then you would expect to see a definite trend away
from heel striking as the group got faster.
Perhaps most interesting is what seems to happen during fatigue.
Ground contact times increase in both studies, regardless of foot strike. If
we remember back to what typically impacts ground contact time, it
provides some interesting clues. Ground contact changed even when foot
strike did not, so we can eliminate that possibility. The other two
possibilities are that leg stiffness and use of elastic energy changed, which
is entirely possible but impossible to know, or that rate of force
development was diminished. There is some research showing fatigue
changes leg stiffness and stretch shortening cycle fatigue. The most likely
scenario is that fatigue is impacting the body’s ability to produce force in
--- PAGE 162 ---
as short of a time period. The foot has to be on the ground longer in order
to generate sufficient force to maintain the pace.
Lastly, in the 1500m study, it was interesting to see a change in foot
strike pattern. During the last lap, you saw an increase in heel striking.
This would seem surprising, as generally one of the faster laps in the race
is the last as people try and kick it in. The question is why do runners
switch to a heel strike under heavy fatigue? One possibility is that stride
length tends to decrease with fatigue and runners are trying to compensate
by lengthening their stride, but instead of doing it by pushing off and
covering more distance, they simply let their lower leg reach out. Another
possibility is that fatigue may impact fine control of the lower leg. As
fatigue builds up, the body tends to ignore less critical functions, so the
sensory feedback that tells the higher motor centers that we are heel
striking are filtered out and ignored. While early on, the brain paid
attention to the feedback and didn’t want us to heel strike so that injury
was avoided, under heavy fatigue the body is more worried about
protecting critical functions so impact forces due to heel strike are seen as
unimportant. Lastly, in a surprising twist, our body could make us heel
strike subconsciously as a way to slow us down. While this seems
contradictory, on a subconscious level it knows that if we slow down
fatigue will start to dissipate, therefore heel striking might be a sort of
protective mechanism when we are venturing too far away from
homeostasis. Regardless of the cause, it’s obvious that lower leg
biomechanics can play a role in not only performance but also in resisting
fatigue.
Structure
One last factor can impact biomechanical efficiency and that is the
individual variance in the structure of a person. There are certain structural
characteristics that make a person more efficient. A reduced lower leg
mass in elite African runners has been hypothesized to partially explain
their superiority in RE (Larsen 2003). This would be due to the fact that a
reduction in mass at the extremes would reduce the energy cost of
swinging the lower leg through during running. A study by Scholz found
that runners with shorter heels had better RE (2008). This is due to the fact
that a shorter Achilles tendon moment arm results in greater elastic
--- PAGE 163 ---
storage. Additional structural factors that affect running economy include
body fat percentage, pelvis width, and foot size (Saunders et al. 2004).
Since an individual’s structure cannot, or can only minimally, be changed,
I won’t go into great detail on the subject. The good news is that there are
a wide variety of runners with varying body shapes who have been
successful on the elite level.
How Much Does Each Factor Contribute?
Each contributing factor to efficiency is not equal. As discussed, the
human body is a wonderfully complex machine that has many
mechanisms that work in conjunction with each other. So teasing out how
much each item contributes to the energetic cost of running is a tall order.
In a series of elegant experiments, Dr. Rodger Kram has done an
amazing job of trying to tackle that question. I first heard of Dr. Kram’s
unique experiments when he spoke to my undergrad biomechanics class
while I was at the University of Houston. He described a contraption that
he and his grad students had built to determine the cost of horizontal
forces during running (Chang & Kram, 1999). They created a device that
used a treadmill and a type of pulley system. In this particular study, they
found that around 39% of the energy used was for forward propulsion.
Over the next decade, Kram and his colleagues devised different
apparatuses to tease out the how much is attributed to supporting your
body weight (Teunisson et al. 2007) and swinging your legs through
(Modica & Kram, 2005). These were the three big components that
contributed to the energy cost of running that could be measured. They
found that supporting your body weight cost around 73% of the total
energy required while swinging your legs through cost ~20%. In each of
these experiments, a device was made to eliminate or negate the
component they were trying to study so that they could calculate the
energetic requirement. For example in the leg swing study, a device-
assisted with pulling the leg through, so that the subject didn’t have to,
thus eliminating the energy requirement.
The one problem with this model is that it segments out each
individual component, and we know the body works as a well-tuned
--- PAGE 164 ---
whole. If you have ever dealt with running form, it is obvious that
changing one component significantly affects another part of the body. To
combat this, all three devices were combined, so that Kram could study
the energetic cost of body support, leg swing, and horizontal propulsion
all at once. In this grand study, it was calculated that combined these
parameters equaled almost 90% of the cost of running (Wardripp & Kram,
2007).
Not wanting to stop there, Kram’s group also looked at the cost of
swinging your arms (Arrellano & Kram, 2011), maintaining balance
(Arrellano & Kram, 2012), and of running on different cushioned surfaces
(Tung et al.,2012). Interestingly, the results for arm swing actually found
that swinging your arms gives you an energy saving effect of around 4%
compared to not swinging your arms. The reason for this is likely that the
arm swing counterbalances the leg rotation, and there could be an additive
effect that swinging your arms provides towards force application to the
ground. The cost of maintaining balance was ~2%, and the cost of running
on a hard surface versus one cushioned with 10mm or 20mm of EVA
differed by roughly 2%. The interesting part was that the 10mm
cushioning “saved” more energy than the 20mm cushioning,
demonstrating that there is a sweet spot between dampening the amount of
work your body has to do to cushion for impact and the amount of hard
energy return needed from the ground.
While these studies are rough models and are not going to give exact
figures, they do demonstrate quite uniquely what the main energetic
contributors are biomechanically. It’s also a nice demonstration of how
our body functions as a whole with the many different movements of our
upper and lower body working in concert to produce the most efficient
movement pattern possible.
 
Optimizing Biomechanics and Running
Economy
Looking at how biomechanics affects RE is a difficult proposition.
Most scientists ignore the fact that runners have years of motor
programming that has already developed neural pathways for their
individual stride, thus they are very efficient neurally at that stride. It is
--- PAGE 165 ---
possible that a runner could be running less mechanically efficient, but has
adapted to that stride after years of training so that their RE is relatively
good. For example, in looking at Cavanagh’s study, the question becomes
are runners most efficient at their selected stride length because that is
their optimal stride length mechanically or is it because they have adapted
to that stride from years of running and thus it has become their “optimal”
because it is an ingrained motor program? In other words, with training
could a different stride length become more efficient? Unfortunately, no
long-term training studies have been done to clear up this picture. As will
be discussed shortly, there could be a flaw in measuring economy or
efficiency that may be clouding the research results. The way economy is
measured greatly affects the conclusions that can be drawn.
Comparison studies between elite and non-elite runners may help to
provide clues on what optimal running mechanics consist of. In a study by
Leskinen, world-class 1500m runners (~3:35 for 1,500m) were compared
to national class runners (~3:49) (2009). It was found that the elite runners
demonstrated a more efficient use of the hip joint and potentially more
elastic energy utilization. The importance of hip extension was also noted
in the study by Kyrolainen (2001). This should make sense, as hip
extension can both generate a lot of force and, if done correctly, results in
a stretch reflex occurring that helps cycle the leg through the recovery
phase.

--- PAGE 166 ---
The manipulation of biomechanics to improve RE in distance
runners is often a subject of controversy. As mentioned previously, the
complexity of efficiency makes discerning the effects of changes in
biomechanics on RE a difficult one. This is due to the fact that when
changing biomechanics it should be expected that a short-term reduction
in economy would occur due to the fact that new motor programming has
to take place and muscle recruitment patterns may change. Therefore,
doing short-term studies on changes in RE via mechanical manipulations
might not be a good idea. However, evidence exists that some mechanical
changes may improve RE. The study by Morgen and colleagues changed
stride length using audio and visual feedback that resulted in optimizing
step length and an improvement in RE (1994). This study points to the
idea that mechanical manipulations can improve RE. Lastly, the practical
experience of many of the world’s best track coaches who focus on
manipulation of technique provides evidence from the practical world.
 
Neuromuscular Efficiency
In addition to the various components that impact mechanical and
metabolic efficiency, neuromuscular characteristics need to be taken into
consideration. This efficiency can be broken into two categories, factors
that improve the neural signaling and motor programming of the running
motion and those that improve the muscle force production itself. Recall
how the running movement occurs. Reflexes and motor programs at the
brain and spinal level combine to result in the running motion. Although it
is often not considered one, running is a skill, just like hitting a baseball or
swinging a golf club. As with those skills, practice is needed to improve
efficiency at the activity. As the movement is practiced the body becomes
more efficient by refining the motor program, learning exactly what
muscles to recruit, what ones to inhibit, and the exact number of muscle
fibers needed. It is through this refinement that the movement becomes
better coordinated and efficient. Research has demonstrated these claims,
consistently showing that repeated practice results in improved muscle
fiber recruitment and movement control (Bonacci et al., 2009). A more
efficient recruitment pattern decreases RE because of the intricate linking
between VO2 and RE.
--- PAGE 167 ---
Neuromuscular efficiency can also be seen through muscle
activation studies comparing untrained with moderately or well-trained
individuals. In a study done comparing cyclists, differences in muscle
recruitment were found. Novice cyclists showed greater variability in
muscle recruitment between pedals, more variations of recruitment
between each individual, more muscle co-activation, and longer muscle
activation periods than well-trained cyclists (Chapman et al., 2008). These
results point to the idea that training can improve neuromuscular
characteristics. The fact the neuromuscular adaptations do occur gives an
explanation for how resistance or explosive type training could improve
RE, which will be discussed in detail later.
 
Applying Force to the Ground
The muscle contraction itself also plays an important role in
neuromuscular efficiency. The ground reaction forces (GRF) and contact
time influence both neural and biomechanical efficiency. GRF is
explained by its namesake, it is simply the forces that occur when the foot
makes contact with the ground. These forces are typically shown in their
vertical form as the force exerted upward as the foot hits the ground and
then as the person applies force to the ground. GRF can also occur in two
other planes, side-to-side and front to back. Ground contact time is self-
explanatory and refers to the amount of time that the foot is in contact
with the ground. These two factors combine to partially determine speed.
To be successful, not only does a runner need to impart a large amount of
force into the ground for propulsion, but they need to do so in a short
period of time, often around a tenth of a second. Thus, it is not only about
force production but also about the rate of force production.
A study by Weyand uniquely demonstrated this by comparing ground
reaction forces in running, hopping, and backward running (2010). They
demonstrated that during the other activities higher peak forces could be
developed but ground contact time was longer, thus it took longer to
develop such forces. During running, the forces weren’t as high, but they
were generated in a very short amount of time due to the short ground
contact period. Their study demonstrated that total force development is
--- PAGE 168 ---
not the limiter in how fast someone can run, but rather the limiter is how
quickly force can be developed.
In terms of RE and long distance running, a runner would be most
economical if they produced only the amount of force necessary to run at
a given pace. In a study by Wright and Weyand, they found that the
determining factors for VO2 were the rate of ground force application and
the amount of muscle mass activated (2001). Therefore these two factors
combine to impact RE. Backing up this idea, Heise and Martin found that
the amount of vertical GRF, when combined with the time it took to apply
this force, explained 38% of the variability of RE between individuals in
their study (2001). Therefore, maximizing rate of force development so
that ground contact is minimized creates a more efficient runner.
 
Muscle Fiber Characteristics
Lastly, the characteristics of the muscles themselves impact
efficiency both metabolically and neuromuscularly. In particular, the
muscle fiber type is of particular interest. There have been several studies
that have found a correlation between Slow Twitch (ST) fiber percentages
and improved RE (Svedenhag & Sjodin, 1994; Saunders et al., 2004).
Other studies have found correlations between cycling efficiency and ST
fiber content (Coyle et al., 1992). This is partially due to the ST fibers
being better equipped to utilize oxygen due to its increased mitochondria,
myoglobin, and Krebs cycle enzymes. With an increase in mitochondria,
less oxygen will be used per mitochondria chain. This would result in a
more efficient use of oxygen, resulting in a decrease in VO2. Another
explanation is based on the mechanical efficiency of the different muscle
fibers. For a specific muscle fiber, its peak efficiency occurs at one-third
of its maximum contraction velocity (Coyle et al., 1992). Given that
endurance training and competitions rely on slower muscle contractions,
ST fibers will be closer to their peak efficiency during endurance
activities. Backing this up, Coyle found that during endurance cycling, the
contraction velocity of the vastus lateralis was close to the peak efficiency
rate of ST fibers leading to greater mechanical efficiency (1992). Thus, ST
fibers are likely more efficient when an activity requires slower
--- PAGE 169 ---
contractions, while FT fibers are most efficient during activities that
require very rapid shortening.
In addition, the makeup of the individual muscle fibers themselves
could impact RE. Titin has been shown to have elastic properties, which
aid in the storage and then subsequent utilization of that energy. Thus Titin
could potentially spare chemical energy use (Kyrolaine et al., 2001). It is
possible that each fiber type stores elastic energy to a different degree.
 
Metabolic Efficiency
The processes that result in energy production determine metabolic
efficiency. How much oxygen is needed by the muscles, the efficiency in
delivering and utilizing that oxygen, and how well substrates can be
utilized all play a role. Each of these factors can be improved to a large
degree with training.
Oxygen’s role should be readily apparent after reading the chapter
on how oxygen is delivered and utilized. Additionally, the traditional
measurement for running economy relies on VO2 at a given speed to
quantify efficiency. That explains why efficiency is often looked at in
terms of the percent of VO2max that a person can run at for a given race
distance. The lower percent of maximum he can run at it, the more
efficient the runner is thought to be. Efficiency is impacted by many of the
steps from oxygen intake to transportation to utilization that were
discussed in the previous chapter on oxygen’s role.
 
Substrate Utilization
The preferred fuel source in endurance races that last less than a
couple of hours is glycogen. The body has a finite supply of glycogen
stored in the muscles, while it has a relatively large supply of fat. Due to
the limited glycogen stores, in longer distance races, such as a marathon,
glycogen depletion is a major source of fatigue. However, in races of
under an hour, which includes most of the distance races (3k, 5k, 10k, half
marathon), glycogen depletion is generally not considered a major source
of fatigue, but instead plays a large role in determining the training load
(Costill & Trappe, 2002). Given its importance and limited supply, how
--- PAGE 170 ---
efficiently glycogen can be used is an important factor in training runners.
Reducing the rate of glycogen use at a given speed will improve the
metabolic efficiency of a runner.
For the marathon, substrate use and total glycogen stores greatly
influence performance. While glycogen is never fully depleted during
such a race, it seems that the body induces a slowing of the pace as
glycogen levels drop, presumably to limit the reduction in glycogen
stores. Well-trained runners use a mixture of fuel sources such as
carbohydrate, fat, and a minimal amount of protein. Thus to delay fatigue
from low glycogen, either an increase in total glycogen storage or a shift
in being able to use more fat as a fuel source at marathon pace is
necessary. Long runs and high mileage training tend to increase the total
glycogen supply of the muscles. A change in the fuel source ratio also
comes from long aerobic running and moderate paced aerobic running.
Additionally, research has demonstrated that dietary manipulation such as
training in a fasted state is one way to increase the use of fat as a fuel.
Therefore, for a marathon runner, some runs, and long runs should be
done without taking supplemental fuel, as low glycogen during the run
seems to be the signal for a shift in substrate use.
          Even though glycogen depletion is not a direct cause of
fatigue in shorter events, adaptations that change substrate utilization can
aid performance in middle distance events. With the high volumes of
training done, glycogen depletion during training can impact training
intensity and adaptation. A large percentage of training is done at easy to
moderate paces (Esteve-Lanao et al., 2007). The intensity of this running
allows for significant contribution of fat as an energy source, which would
help alleviate the strain on glycogen stores during high volume daily
distance running. One training adaptation that shifts the balance of fat and
carbohydrate use towards fat usage is mitochondria density (Brooks &
Mercier, 1994). An increase in mitochondria and mitochondrial enzymes,
which occurs with endurance training, allows for greater use of fat as a
fuel.
However, it is also possible that glycogen depletion could play a
role in fatigue in shorter races. While glycogen depletion is usually only
thought of in terms of long duration exercise where total glycogen
depletion is a problem, it can occur at a local muscular level. Glycogen
--- PAGE 171 ---
breakdown occurs within each working muscle fiber, in addition to some
total body glycogen breakdown stimulated by hormones. It cannot be
transported from fiber to fiber, except when converted to lactate,
transferred, and then reconverted to glycogen. Given this, glycogen
depletion can occur in individual fibers before total glycogen depletion
occurs, and the selective depletion depends on the intensity of the activity
and the use of that fiber (Abernathy et al., 1990). Therefore it can play a
role in fatigue in much shorter events. With glycogen depletion of a
muscle fiber, that fiber can no longer perform work at the same intensity;
therefore with fibers getting glycogen depleted, there are fewer total fibers
to cycle in and do work, potentially causing fatigue due to the increased
demand put on the other fibers. This can be seen in animal models that
showed that after partial glycogen depletion anaerobic performance was
impaired (Lacombe et al., 1999). Research done by Jacobs showed the
specificity of glycogen depletion when they compared a group that almost
exclusively depleted ST fiber glycogen with one that partially depleted
both ST and FT fibers (1981). In the ST only group, maximum strength
was not impaired but muscular endurance was. In the FT and ST depleted
group, maximum strength was impaired, presumably because of the
glycogen depletion in the FT muscle fibers.
 
Substrate Utilization and the Actual Running
Economy Measurement
Due to the way RE is commonly measured, what the energy source is
will affect the measurement. RE is commonly calculated by dividing the
rate of oxygen uptake by running speed. VO2 is used because, when
measured at a speed using almost entirely aerobic energy sources, it
represents the amount of ATP used. However, the common measurement
does not take into account that the energy equivalent of O2 depends on
which substrate is used. Fats, carbohydrates, and proteins all provide a
different amount of energy per liter of O2.
When expressed as a unit of caloric cost, RE is more sensitive to
changes in substrate use. This is particularly important in distance events
that are limited by fuel issues, such as glycogen depletion. Thus while
substrate utilization might not be as big of a worry for a middle distance
--- PAGE 172 ---
athlete in terms of efficiency, for a marathon runner it is one of the most
important factors. A marathoner who is able to utilize fats more will spare
his glycogen stores, delaying fatigue. For the marathoner, it is not only
about total glycogen stores, but the rate at which those are used. His goal
is to run as fast as he can while using glycogen at a rate that will put him
depleted just after the finish line. Training to be able to utilize a greater
amount of fat at marathon pace will increase performance. Our
marathoner should be more concerned with looking at RE in terms of
caloric cost because he is less concerned with RE as measured in terms of
VO2 since that is not his race limiter. That brings us to one of the
problems with RE measurements. It can be expressed in several different
ways that all take into account different efficiencies (metabolic,
biomechanical, or neural) to a higher degree.
 
My Own Running Economy:
Problems with Running Economy
As mentioned previously, one problem with RE is that it can be
measured and expressed in several different ways. The most common
ways are expressing it in terms of VO2 at a given speed, and
VO2/distance. There are two ways to report VO2 using running speed.
One is to express it in terms of the VO2 at an absolute speed, while the
other is to express it as VO2/speed. These rely on the idea that below a
certain speed (around Lactate Threshold) the oxygen cost is independent
of speed. However, Vickers demonstrated that this is not the case (2010).
When measuring economy at an absolute speed, runners will be running at
vastly different relative intensities, which will change several factors.
Biomechanical factors such as ground contact, ground reaction forces,
stride lengths, and frequencies are all speed dependent. One individual at
6-minute mile pace may need a very low percentage of their max force
development, while another runner might need a much larger percentage,
thus changing ground contact times. That is but one example of how speed
--- PAGE 173 ---
affects biomechanics. In addition, substrate use would be vastly different
among groups of individuals at an absolute speed. Since races are of a
given distance, expressing RE as the oxygen cost per unit of distance
seems to make more sense, but it still neglects the effect substrate use has.
One last way that RE is reported is caloric cost. In this measurement,
the Respiratory Exchange Ratio (RER) is used to calculate the caloric
equivalent of VO2, which can be used to determine the amount of energy
used per unit of distance. A study by Fletcher compared RE expressed as
VO2/distance and caloric unit cost (2009). They stated that the traditional
way of measuring RE appeared to be flawed for several of the reasons
discussed earlier, and for the practical reason that faster runners tended to
have worse economy, which makes little logical sense. In their study,
Fletcher found that the better runners had a lower energy cost of running
(better economy) and that RE expressed as caloric unit cost was much
more sensitive to changes in speed. One of the interesting findings was
that RE determined using the VO2 measurement showed that RE was
independent of speed. The caloric unit cost showed that RE got worse as
speed increased, which would be the expected outcome as when speed
increases reliance on carbohydrates also increases. This debate on how to
measure RE demonstrates that we have a long way to go in understanding
efficiency. It also makes one question the conclusions based on studies
looking at what improves RE.
One other problem with measuring RE is whether to use gross or net
VO2. Gross VO2 refers to the total oxygen consumption, while net refers
to the total oxygen consumption minus the resting value. It has been
hypothesized that net would better reflect active energy usage and correct
for a speed-related bias that is present when measuring RE as VO2/speed
(Vickers, 2005).
RE is used as a means of quantifying total efficiency. However,
given that one is basing efficiency off of VO2, the merits of this approach
may be in question. According to Noakes’ CGM VO2 may be a result of a
central governor regulating VO2 by muscle activation. If this is true, then
RE reflects the degree of muscle activation at a given pace. This still
means it is a valid measurement, and it may reflect efficiency of muscle
--- PAGE 174 ---
activation. However, the degree that it can be used to measure and
quantify mechanical, metabolic, and neuromuscular efficiency is
unknown. Separating efficiency into these three different categories might
aid in clearing the quiet muddy picture of what affects RE, or in this case
total efficiency. The interactions of the different types of efficiency may
also explain the mixed results in changing biomechanics or why there are
contrasting results on what is the most efficient way to run in the
literature. In a study by Purkiss, they demonstrate a model of calculating
internal work that allowed for distinguishing efficient and inefficient
running styles in elite runners (2003).
Also, the measurement of RE may be suspect if we look at a recent
study by Baden. In that study, RE changed when the participants did not
know when they were stopping exercise, even though they ran for the
same amount of time as they did during the test when they knew for how
long they would be exercising (20 minutes) (2004). The results of these
studies demonstrate that another mechanism may regulate RE based on
feedback. The fact that RE could change solely based on outside feedback
such as when exercise would be completed is interesting and may lead to
reevaluation of the way we test RE. Lastly, efficiency needs to be put into
context when using it as a performance measure. The fact is that
performance is the main concern, and efficiency should not be the only
thing taken into consideration. It is possible, because of the way we
measure efficiency, that a parameter that improves RE could be
detrimental to performance. For example, increased vertical oscillation
decreases RE, but if that vertical oscillation results in a far greater stride
length, it is possible that the person has increased efficiency per unit of
distance traveled. Taken by itself, vertical oscillation might be detrimental
but taken in context of the whole locomotion a slight increase could prove
beneficial. An example of this can be seen in a study done in converting
runners to the POSE technique of running. After 12 weeks of training, the
runners reduced their vertical oscillation significantly, by 1.52cm on
average, but their RE was significantly impaired (Dallam et al., 2005).
This was due to a significant reduction in stride length. Thus, it is the
optimization of the variable, and giving hard recommendations may not be
appropriate.
--- PAGE 175 ---
In conclusion, the measurement of RE may need to be called into
question as a measure of total efficiency. This would have significant
repercussions in the interpretation of many studies. Looking at other
methods of calculating efficiency may be more beneficial, as the two
groups mentioned above have done (Fletcher et al., 2009; Purkiss et al.,
2003). Furthermore, evidence from the world of cycling may shed some
light on using a measure based on VO2. Using a measurement of VO2
economy, cyclists were most efficient at pedaling rates that were relatively
low, 40-65 revolutions per minute (rpm), while professional cyclists
preferred pedal rates that were much higher, over 90rpm. These higher
rates consistently show a much higher submaximal VO2. Rather than
coming to the conclusion that the elite cyclists were wrong and needed to
have lower pedaling rates, Belli and Hintzy instead expressed efficiency
as the energy cost of cycling, in terms of joules per kilogram per minute
(2002). Using this method, it was found that the energy cost was lowest at
pedal rates that matched those preferred by elite cyclists. The authors
concluded that energy cost represented biomechanical efficiency much
better than the economy measurement. A similar scenario could easily
play out in running if we looked at stride rate and length instead of pedal
rate. These results may explain some of the discrepancies between what
coaches suggest is correct biomechanically and what appears in the
research; the heel strike versus mid-foot strike and the degree of vertical
oscillation would be prime examples. The problem isn’t with the
importance of economy or efficiency but with the actual measurement
used to define economy.
 
--- PAGE 176 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 178 ---
8

--- PAGE 179 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 180 ---
The Brain-Muscle Connection
“The subjective experience of pain is constructed from both our
physiological state and contextual data…when nerve cells send a signal to
the pain centers of your brain, your experience of pain can vary even if
those signals don’t.” Leonard Mlodinow
 
The aforementioned VO2max, Running Economy, and Lactate
Threshold make up the traditional trio of running performance, but there
are several other factors that contribute to performance such as anaerobic,
neuromuscular, and psychological factors. While distance running and
even middle distance running is primarily an aerobic activity, anaerobic
systems play a significant role. In the 1,500m estimates of anaerobic
contribution have generally been found to be about 20%, while in the
3,000m event for men 16% anaerobic contribution was found (Hill, 1999).
Despite this fact, for years the traditional research ignored the anaerobic
contributions to performance in their models. In the following chapter,
we’ll delve into some of the neglected contributors to running
performance work.
Understanding the entire picture is crucial for athletes and coaches
looking to maximize performance. It is easy to focus on the main
contributors, but when we consider that well-trained runners are thankful
for any improvement they can get, the smaller contributors cannot be
ignored. Traditional training programs focus mostly on the aerobic aspect
of running, neglecting the neuromuscular and even anaerobic. Since the
time of Lydiard, the anaerobic contribution has been misunderstood. It is
not the evil system that it is often portrayed to be, but instead it requires a
little more fine-tuning and balance than the aerobic system. Let’s take a
look at these nontraditional factors and see what they mean in regards to
performance.
 
Neuromuscular and Anaerobic Factors in
Performance
--- PAGE 181 ---
Since the majority of distance running performance is tied to
traditional factors focused on aerobic components, most of the research
has followed that route. However, recent research has shown that
anaerobic and neuromuscular factors play a role in improving distance
running performance. One such study was done by Paavolainen which
found that better performance in a 10km run was partially due to increased
pre-activation and decreased ground contact time (1999). Pre-activation
could potentially increase RE due to a tightening of the muscle-tendon
system that would increase elastic storage. In another study by
Paavolainen, performance on a maximal anaerobic running test was
significantly correlated with running performance over 5,000m (1999a).
Lastly one study found that anaerobic work capacity and power
contributed significantly to a model explaining running performance in
Cross-Country and over a 10km race (Sinnett et al., 2001). These studies
demonstrate that anaerobic factors are crucial for distance running
success.
There are many components that affect anaerobic capacity and
power. Anaerobic power refers to the rate of energy turnover for the
anaerobic systems, while capacity is the total energy turnover. Factors that
affect both of these include muscle fiber type, recruitment, and force
production.
 
Muscle Fiber Type
 Muscle fiber type will largely influence anaerobic capabilities. The
differences between Slow Twitch (ST) and the various Fast Twitch muscle
fibers (FT-a,x,c) make this clear. Fast Twitch fibers offer several
advantages for force and power production, with the tradeoff being a
reduction in aerobic abilities. FT fibers have a higher Myosin ATPase
activity, which means they also have a quicker shortening velocity (Fitts &
Widrick, 1996). Due to this increased shortening velocity, FT fibers have
greater power outputs. FT fibers also have more muscle fibers per motor
neuron, which allows for greater force production than ST fibers that have
fewer fibers per neuron. Lastly, FT fibers have a larger Creatine Phosphate
store, more Glycolytic enzymes, and a larger Sarcoplasmic Reticulum.
The larger Sarcoplasmic Reticulum will result in enhanced Calcium
--- PAGE 182 ---
delivery (Stephenson et al., 1998). All of these differences give FT muscle
fibers an advantage in anaerobic related activities. However, it is a blend
of FT and ST fibers that can lead to optimal performance because of their
various strengths and weaknesses. Can we train for an optimal balance of
fiber types or are fiber types predetermined and should we instead find the
sport that matches our fiber types?
Conversion of muscle fiber type was previously believed to be
impossible. It was thought that whatever muscle fiber types you were born
with, you were set with these. However, recent research suggests that that
view is erroneous. Changes within Fast Twitch fibers in humans have been
demonstrated in numerous studies, so that conversion from FT-x to FT-a
or any other subset is now commonly accepted. A full conversion from FT
to ST is still debated in humans. If we look at research in animals, this
conversion can be seen (Pette, 1999). So why don’t we see it in humans?
First, in animal studies it takes a large amount of chronic low-frequency
stimulation to get this conversion to occur. And, in particularly resistant
fibers, it sometimes takes muscle damage combined with chronic
stimulation of the fiber to get a full fiber type conversion (Pette, 1999).
If we use common sense, then we would have to believe that every
distance runner pre-selected themselves into distance running since almost
every runner tested shows a large percentage of Slow Twitch fibers. While
some pre-selection obviously occurs, when we test fiber types of
populations, we only see the end result. There are no studies that test
someone before they begin their journey down the path to distance runner
stardom for obvious reasons. If we look at longitudinal studies that looked
at muscle fiber types in high level endurance athletes, changes can be
seen. A longitudinal study by Rusko found that after 8 years of training
and a doubling of training volume, the percentage of ST fibers in a group
of Cross-Country Skiers increased by 11% (1992).
Why do I bring up the possible change in muscle fiber type? One
reason is that it could partially explain why runners tend to reach peak
performance levels later than sprint or power type athletes. It could be
because distance runners need large amounts of training, or damage, to
complete this muscle fiber type conversion. Secondly, this fiber
conversion could also partially explain the success of African distance
runners. Perhaps their large volumes of unofficial training early on, such
--- PAGE 183 ---
as running to school or even the active lifestyle that they live, allows for
this conversion to take place at a younger age. It is well established that
there are certain physiological and even epigenetic components that are
more susceptible to imprinting and changing earlier in life. Africans tend
to reach peak performance at younger ages then their Western counterparts
and this could partially explain that phenomenon.
The long-term changes in muscle fiber type are important for the
coach to understand. It points to the idea that training cannot be seen
through a segmented season to season viewpoint but should instead be
seen through a lifetime and long term view. The athlete changes from the
start to the end of his competitive career and training should be adjusted to
accommodate and even facilitate those changes. That is why we cannot
get stuck in a cookie cutter–coaching plan or have one dogmatic
philosophy.
 
Fatigue and the CNS
From a neuromuscular standpoint, fatigue can occur either centrally
or peripherally. Central fatigue means that it occurs sometime between the
CNS initiating and the muscle receiving the signal for contraction to
occur. Peripheral fatigue occurs between the time when the muscle
receives the signal and actual contraction takes place. Fatigue at both
levels is generally reflected by changes in motor unit recruitment,
decrease in relaxation time, and a decrease in neural signaling among
other changes. A buildup of metabolic by-products, depletion of fuel
sources, or a decrease in central drive can all affect the neuromuscular
system by decreasing force output. Attention will be given to changes that
occur along the route of the CNS signaling for muscle recruitment to take
place. The focus is not on what exactly causes neural fatigue, as that
differs for each event, but on how it manifests itself during a race and how
to combat it. There are several different factors that can be altered to
prevent fatigue from a neuromuscular standpoint. Changes that can occur
neurally that may enhance performance include increased muscle fiber
recruitment pool, a decrease in time to activate muscle, and an increase in
rate of force development.
--- PAGE 184 ---
 The CNS decision on the specifics of muscle fiber recruitment
affects both anaerobic attributes and neuromuscular characteristics. There
are several potential ways that muscle fiber recruitment can delay fatigue.
First, an increase in the muscle fiber pool allows for more fibers to be
available to do the work, thus delaying fatigue. Second, during fatigue a
decrease in the Action Potential signal strength and velocity occurs
(Leppers et al., 2002). Training to decrease the degree of activation
needed for those fibers to be recruited allows for the ability to recruit such
fibers when fatigue is high and the neural recruitment signal is not as
strong.
In a study by Nummella a significant correlation was found between
EMG levels at the 3km mark of a 5km time trial and the average velocity
that the 5k was run at (2006). Essentially, the runners who could maintain
a higher level of muscle activation during the middle section of the 5k had
better finishing times for the entire distance. This shows that maintaining
muscle recruitment during a distance race is an important factor for
success. If we tie this back into the fatigue models, it’s clear to see why.
The runner whose recruitment is dropping is having fatigue buildup earlier
than the others. Depending on the fatigue model, training to increase
muscle fiber recruitment during hard training may be one way to combat
this problem. If we can “force” recruitment during heavy fatigue with high
force activities, it will train the maintenance of recruitment during a race.
Some preliminary evidence for this can be seen with strength endurance
work, which is discussed in the training section of this book.
Another interesting find in this study is the increase in EMG at the
end of the race when the runners demonstrated the “end spurt” or “kick”
phenomenon. The ability to recruit additional motor units under heavy
fatigue at the end of the race impacts one’s ability to increase the speed in
the closing stages of a race. This idea could explain why heavy resistance
training or sprinting improves distance running performance, as it
increases the total muscle fiber pool that can be recruited. Some evidence
for this idea is that in the Nummela study, the velocity of this final lap end
spurt was not related to VO2max or RE, but to the vMART, suggesting
that neuromuscular abilities are what determine the end spurt, and not the
oxygen dynamics.
--- PAGE 185 ---
In distance running, the various muscle fibers work so that they are
rotated so that some fibers do the work while others rest and then the
others cycle in and take over. This works well at low intensities, but as
intensity increases more force is required, so more fibers have to be
activated to do the work, and the time that they can “cycle off” and rest is
reduced. As fatigue sets in, fibers begin to fatigue, and harder to recruit
fibers are called upon. When fatigue gets intense, there is a decrease in the
number of muscle fibers recruited as the neural drive decreases and the
number of fibers that are fatigued has reached a high level. This is where
increasing the muscle fiber pool comes into play. Even during maximum
voluntary contractions, a person can never fully recruit all of his fibers.
There is always a reserve, which makes sense if we realize the body's
design to always have a safety net. Research has demonstrated that well-
trained athletes are able to tap into a higher percentage of that reserve than
untrained athletes. For distance runners who rarely ever do high force
activities like sprinting, their total recruitable fibers will be lower than
those runners who have trained to recruit fibers during high force
activities. The increase in fiber pool allows for more muscle fibers to be
recruited or cycled in, thus delaying fatigue.
Another neural factor is rate of force development. As has been
covered already, the amount of time that a runner has to produce force
while the foot is on the ground is very limited. Weyend demonstrated that
we do not have time to reach max force levels even during sprinting
(2010). Therefore, it is more a matter of rate of force development than
total force application. If distance runners can be trained to increase their
rate of force development, this allows for several beneficial adaptations.
At slow speeds it means they are working at a lower percentage of their
max force production capacities, which should extend endurance. During
race speeds, it also means that they can generate the necessary forces
required to run at their faster pace. This means that ground contact times
can be reduced as not as much time is needed to generate the force.
Previous research has shown that decreased ground contact times result in
less time having to support the weight of the body and thus improved
Running Economy. One result of training that improves rate of force
development is a decrease in the time required to activate a muscle.
Research using explosive strength training by Mikkola demonstrated that
--- PAGE 186 ---
with training endurance athletes could be trained to enhance rapid muscle
activation (2007).
Further research in the area that anaerobic and neuromuscular
factors play in regards to distance running is needed. The ability to close
fast in the later parts of the race has been suggested to be what separates
the best runners, and it has been speculated that this might be due to an
ability to increase motor unit activation in the later parts of the race
(Noakes, 2003). The aforementioned data by Nummella seems to support
this notion (2006). The previously mentioned field observations in elite
Kenyans being able to run at a MAXLass during a race and then
dramatically increase lactate at the end might also lend credence to this
idea.
As distance coaches we are used to recognizing fatigue that results
from running lots of mileage or hard workouts. What we don’t grasp is
CNS fatigue. The fatigue experienced after doing 50m sprints is a totally
foreign concept. We need to recognize CNS fatigue and implement a
recovery strategy for it just like we do for recovery from a long run.
Additionally, coaches can plan strategies to improve the neuromuscular
performance of an athlete by exploiting training practices to improve
muscle recruitment and coordination.
Temperature Regulation
An increase in body temperature is another mechanism that can
cause fatigue. When core temperature gets to a dangerously high level,
people either slow down dramatically or stop exercise. An interesting fact
is that people terminate exercise at very similar temperatures of around 40
degrees Celsius. This termination of exercise happens regardless of
--- PAGE 187 ---
starting temperature, pre-cooling of the body, or rate of heat loss and
storage (Gonzalez-Alonso et al., 1999). There is a theory that exercise in
hot conditions, where fatigue is likely due to reaching high core body
temperatures, is governed by an anticipatory regulator. This anticipatory
regulation system monitors rate of heat storage and adjusts muscle
activation to delay or prevent overheating. Evidence for this theory comes
from studies that have studied EMG levels in a variety of temperatures.
Lower EMG levels have been seen in hotter temperatures, which should
not be surprising, but the anticipatory regulation can be seen in that EMG
levels are lower early in the exercise when core temperatures were
essentially the same (Tucker et al., 2004). Regardless of the exact
mechanism, it can be seen that slowing the rate of heat storage can
enhance endurance. In addition, other mechanisms related to heat and core
temperature increases can potentially impair performance, even before the
critical core temperature is reached.
At higher temperatures more of the blood is redistributed to the skin
to aid in cooling. When this happens, blood flow that is normally going to
the muscles is reduced, potentially hampering performance. Also, at high
muscle temperatures, ATP production is decreased due to a loosening of
the coupling between oxidation and phosphorylation in mitochondria
(Brooks et al., 2004).
Delaying heat gain and core temperature increases depends on the
body’s cooling mechanisms. Heat loss can occur via radiation, conduction,
convection, and evaporations. Radiation allows for heat loss due to a
difference in temperature gradient. When the skin temperature is higher
than its surroundings, more heat radiates from the body. This process
accounts for 60% of heat loss. Conduction is the transfer of heat via direct
contact and accounts for around 3% of heat loss, while convection is the
transfer of heat to air or water and accounts for about 12% of heat loss at
room temperature (Brooks et al., 2004). Blood flow to the skin aids the
process of convection. Heat travels with the blood from the core to the
skin, which then allows for heat loss to the air. In this way, heat is
transferred from the core to the environment, aiding in temperature
control.
Lastly, evaporation accounts for about 25% of heat loss in normal
conditions (Brooks et al., 2004). For heat loss to occur, sweat must
--- PAGE 188 ---
evaporate. In humid conditions, evaporation of sweat is greatly reduced,
thus decreasing heat loss through evaporation. In addition, in very hot
temperatures where the outside temperature is greater than the body
temperature, evaporation is the only means of heat loss since the other
methods are dependent on having a temperature gradient. An acclimatized
person can sweat up to 4 liters per hour; while a person not acclimatized
can only sweat about 1.5 liters per hour (Brooks et al., 2004). Therefore,
heat acclimatization to get this effect could potentially enhance endurance
performance.
For athletes competing in hot environments recognizing that heat
and temperature regulation may be the cause of fatigue is paramount.
Practices can be designed to minimize the effect of temperature on fatigue.
For instance, during the 2004 Athens Olympic marathon several elite
runners used ice vests pre race to decrease their core body temperature
because the temperatures were extremely warm for a marathon. Their
coaches recognized that heat regulation was going to play a bigger part
than usual and designed a strategy to combat that. Recent research has
suggested that drinking ice-cold fluids helps to combat the core body
temperature rise. Using strategies such as these can make a large
difference in hot weather races.
Additionally, heat training can be used to improve performance even
in cooler conditions. While altitude training is the “sexy” thing to do to
increase performance, training in hot and humid conditions has similar
training benefits. When training in warm and humid conditions, the
processes described above are put to the test. Because more of our energy
is being spent on cooling ourselves and more blood flow is being diverted
away from our working muscles, we have an increased stressor at slower
paces. We get an almost altitude like effect of reduced blood flow and thus
oxygen to the working muscles. One of the adaptations that occurs
because of this is an increase in blood volume following training in heat
and humidity. Although the combination of heat and altitude during
periodization is thought of as a newer invention, it is, in fact, what
Olympic champion Frank Shorter employed in the 1970’s by splitting his
training between Florida and Boulder, Colorado. Heat training should be
thought of as an additional stressor to be used to enhance performance. It
might not have the trendiness of altitude, but it has its place.
--- PAGE 189 ---
 
The Psychology of it All
Racing is a very intense activity. Dealing with pain or mental
toughness is often cited as a reason for success in the sport of distance
running. The ability to deal with fatigue and pain could lead to improved
performance. Despite the rigors of training and racing, running remains
one of the most popular activities in the U.S. A look at the motivation of
runners and how they deal with pain is essential in understanding what
makes a successful distance runner.
 
Motivation
The motivation of runners has been analyzed with a variety of
different approaches. Clough (1989) took an interesting approach looking
at running in terms of other leisure activities. They found that runner’s
motivation could be divided into six groups: Well-Being, Social,
Challenge, Status, Fitness/Health, and Addiction. The most important
factors were challenge followed by fitness/health and well-being. While
the first four factors were similar to those seen in other leisure activities,
the last two factors were different. This study set the stage for
acknowledging that there was something extra that set running apart from
other similar activities.
While studies initially compared runners as a whole group, latter
studies pointed to the idea that there are different groups of runners
motivated by different factors. One such study was done by Slay (1998) in
which they found that obligatory runners’ motivations differed from non-
obligatory runners. The obligatory runners were more motivated by
negative or external factors such as guilt of stopping and weight control.
In another study on committed runners who ran more than 40 miles per
week, it was found that the committed runners were more motivated by
mastery, competition, and weight regulation (Scott and Thorton, 1995).
Lastly, Ogles and Masters (2003) found that marathon runners could be
divided into several groups based on their motivation profiles. These
groups were: running enthusiasts, lifestyle managers, personal goal
achievers, personal accomplishers, and competitive achievers. These
--- PAGE 190 ---
studies demonstrate that runners’ motivations differ based on their level of
running, goals, and experience.
Motivation also tends to vary based on skill level. Although not done
with runners, a study by Chantel (1996) looked at the differences in
motivation in elite athletes. They looked at motivation in terms of Deci
and Ryan’s Self Determination Theory, using the Sports Motivation Scale
(SMS) as a way to measure Self Determination. The Self Determination
Theory states that there is a continuum of motivation that includes three
different levels of internal motivation, three levels of external motivation,
and one level of amotivation. Internal motivation refers to participating in
the activity for its own satisfaction or pleasure. In other words, it is
motivation based on the activity being an end in itself. External
motivation includes doing the activity as a means to an end or for some
external reason. Finally, Amotivation is a lack of motivation and is first on
the continuum.
Chantel found that the best athletes had higher levels of amotivation
and non-self–determined extrinsic motivation. Non-self–determined refers
to external regulation and introjected regulation. It should be noted that
this study was on Bulgarian athletes who were likely influenced by
communist practices. Looking at what motivates elite Kenyan runners,
Onywera (2006) found that they were primarily motivated by economic
incentive, followed by talent and tradition. This finding would seem to
match up with elites having higher extrinsic motivation.
The motivation to run is different at each level of running, so
coaches have to deal with a wide range of motivations. The key is finding
out what motivates each individual runner and to exploit that. In an ideal
world, runners would have both high intrinsic and extrinsic motivation,
meaning they are motivated by internal and external factors. However, the
reality is that coaches need to understand where each runner falls and
exploit it. Additionally, as a coach, it is important to try to influence the
motivation of an athlete so that he can enjoy the sport in the long term.
For example, trying to slowly change someone who is motivated by a fear
of failure to a more healthy motivation is important. The bottom line is
that knowing what makes your athlete tick is valuable information that can
be used to enhance their performance.          
--- PAGE 191 ---
 
Pain Tolerance
Dealing with pain is an everyday occurrence for an endurance
athlete. So it should come as no surprise that how we deal with pain is
different than the everyday person, and it plays a role in our performance.
But it goes beyond simple mental toughness and gritting it out. Let’s take
a brief look at pain research on athletes and see how that translates to
racing.
When researchers study pain, they generally look at pain threshold,
which is when the first initial detection of any pain arises, and pain
tolerance, which is how much pain a person can withstand. To investigate
these areas, researchers apply one of many ever-increasing painful stimuli.
These range from cold immersion to mechanical pressure application to
electric shocks. When we look at the effects of running on pain, we have
to separate it into acute versus chronic effects. Acutely, endurance exercise
creates “exercise-induced hypoalgesia” which basically refers to a reduced
sensation of pain following longer or intense exercise. This is thought to
primarily occur because of opioid secretion and is related to the “runner’s
high” that many people feel.
On the other hand, we have chronic adjustments in pain perception,
which are long lasting adjustments in how our body perceives and deals
with pain. Chronic adjustments deal with modifications in our processing
of the pain signal and enhancement of our pain inhibition system. The
pain system is far too complex to give an entire overview in this section,
but it can be best thought of as a simple sensory feedback system, where
feedback is sent from the periphery to the brain to interpret and create the
sensation of pain. Along the way we can increase or decrease that signal
sent and alter our brain’s interpretation of it.
When we look at chronic changes, there are definite differences in
how athletes versus non-athletes interpret pain. In a metaanalysis looking
at all such studies, Tesarz and colleagues concluded that athletes had a
higher pain tolerance to a wide variety of stimuli (2012). For the most
part, however, athletes did not have a difference in pain threshold. This
means that athletes first sensed pain at the same level but could tolerate
pain for much longer. When looking at runners the picture is much the
--- PAGE 192 ---
same. In one study looking at marathon runners, it was found that they
have a higher pain tolerance and a reduced experience of pain. Similarly,
research on triathletes shows higher pain tolerance levels. In particular,
high-level triathletes had higher pain tolerance when compared to active
athletes, and other research shows that pain perception was related to
aerobic fitness levels (Garcin, 2004). These and similar studies show that
level of prowess may play a role. What explains this elevated pain
tolerance?
An additional component called Conditioned Pain Modulation
(CPM) is used to evaluate the capabilities of the pain system to adapt. A
CPM test consists of the use of two pain stimuli with an almost pre-test
stimuli followed by a secondary stimuli to see how the pain perception
changes. In triathletes, CPM was enhanced, meaning they showed less
pain when both heat and cold stimuli were applied on different arms.
While this improvement might seem obvious, what it tells us is that
triathletes have a more efficient pain modulation system (Geva, 2013).
They are better at modulating the inhibitory effects.
Knowing that athletes have higher pain tolerance and that it is
partially due to a more efficient pain modulation system, can we actually
train and improve these parameters, and, if so, how is that accomplished?
If we again turn to the research the answer can be found. In the study on
triathletes, it was found that there were strong negative relationships
between duration of training and fear of pain, as well as between fear of
pain and inhibition. What this tells us is that longer training duration was
related to lower levels of both fear of pain and pain inhibition. Other
studies have found similar correlations with pain tolerance and training, so
if increased training improves pain management, how does this actually
occur?
If we look at a study by Ord on rowers, pain tolerance correlated
with the number and quality of coping strategies (2003). The better the
rowers were at coping with the pain, the higher their pain tolerance was.
This shouldn’t be surprising as athletes who have to endure pain regularly
in both racing and training would be expected to develop some sort of
coping strategy. Similarly, in a study of marathon runners, the higher pain
tolerance was related to higher associative coping skills and lower
dissociative skills. While we can’t use this as a blanket piece of advice, the
--- PAGE 193 ---
research does provide clues on how we might get better at dealing with
that pain: developing effective coping skills.
Coping skills are critical, and they generally come about by
happenstance and necessity as when we encounter pain during races we
develop ways to deal with and process that psychologically. Instead of
simply relying on whatever natural coping mechanisms you developed, it
would be wise to increase your arsenal and develop a wide range of
coping skills. The coping skills are developed for more than just generic
pain tolerance. Mental stress, fear of pain, and a process called
catastrophizing all influence our pain perception.
A study by Marcora demonstrated that mental fatigue could impair
performance (2009). In comparing groups who performed 90min of
cognitive demanding tasks to a control group that watched documentaries,
they found that the group that performed the cognitive tasks performed
significantly worse on a cycle to exhaustion. Fear of pain can create a
negative feedback loop in which our fear of pain creates an anti-analgesic
effect and counteracts our body’s attempts to inhibit pain. Catastrophizing
is a process in which we exaggerate negative appraisal of the pain
sensations. We have an almost overactive response to the pain, which
creates emotional distress. We’ve all encountered this at some point,
maybe even in a race, and it can almost be thought of as a minor panic
attack. If we learn how to deal with and cope with such instances, we can
modulate our pain perception and improve our pain tolerance.
The altered pain perception in athletes might have an impact in other
ways. One theory is that since athletes constantly challenge themselves in
terms of dealing with pain, they may constantly activate their pain
inhibitory system. This could potentially create a situation where the pain
inhibitory system becomes overworked and becomes “exhausted,” which
generally occurs in those who suffer chronic pain (Tesarz, 2013). If this
occurs, it could explain select cases of overtraining or even sensitivity to
injuries. As an often-overlooked component of pain tolerance is that it
applies to the physical pain felt in muscle pulls or stress fractures too.
The Psychological and Physiological are intricately linked, and we
have much to learn in these areas of study. High-level runners are likely to
have higher degrees of both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, which may
allow them to delve into the deeper depths of perceived pain. Additionally,
--- PAGE 194 ---
well-trained runners probably experience a callusing sort of effect, where
they get used to certain levels of discomfort and pain during practice, so
that they perceive it as being less painful than other runners. The
important take away message is that they are psychologically and
physiologically linked. It is a mistake to blame poor results on an athlete
being “weak” as that is too simplistic of a viewpoint. Instead, recognize
that pain is the result of a combination of many factors and work towards
improving an athlete’s ability to handle it in the correct fashion. Pain is a
perception that can be influenced by both internal and external stimuli,
and appropriate coping strategies should be developed.
--- PAGE 195 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 197 ---
9

--- PAGE 198 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 199 ---
The Genetics of Training
“Our ability to spot patterns is what allows us to make sense of the
world, but sometimes, in our eagerness, we are oversensitive and trigger-
happy and mistakenly spot patterns where none exist.” Ben Goldacre
 
Knowing all of the physiological components that can change with
training is important, as is knowing what kinds of training improves those
components, but how do we get from the workout to those functional
changes? The body must go through a series of steps that takes it from the
training stimulus all the way down to the genetic level and then back up to
a functional change. This process is called the signaling pathway and is
demonstrated in the chart below.
While the coach who reads
this may get discouraged by the
references to certain complex
sounding names, it is important to
not get caught up in the minutia
and to understand the general
concept. Knowing how a training
stimulus results in a tangible
adaptation such as increased
endurance is paramount for
making good decisions on
workout planning. By knowing the
adaptation steps that the body goes
through, the specific aims of a
workout and the recovery post
workout can be set up to optimize
this process. For example, if we
know adaptations related to fuel use are triggered by low glycogen stores,
then that gives us information that we can use to create a training stimulus
that creates low glycogen stores. In this case, a long run would be the
training stimulus, which would seem obvious, but what might be
overlooked is that knowing glycogen stores is the signal for adaptation we
might want to forgo a carbohydrate drink on that long run.
--- PAGE 200 ---
 
Steps of Adaptation
 Training Stimulus
The first step is that a training stimulus is applied; this is what
occurs during the workout. In order for the workout to elicit adaptation, it
has to be significant enough both in terms of intensity and volume to
disturb the body’s homeostasis. The body’s homeostasis can be disturbed
in a variety of ways such as stressors that will impact the mechanical,
metabolic, neural, endocrine, and cardiovascular systems. In reality, all of
these systems function together. Two examples of this process are a high
intensity endurance workout at altitude might decrease the oxygen
saturation levels, while a lengthy endurance workout might result in a
depletion of glycogen. In these cases, the endurance workout at altitude
changed the natural levels of oxygen in the blood, and in the long
endurance workout example the workout caused a change in glycogen
levels. These changes, glycogen and oxygen levels, will act as triggers for
the rest of the adaptation that will be discussed shortly.
Essentially, the body must be put in a state of crisis to trigger the
stages of adaptation. The workout’s goal is to bring about this “crisis.”
Outside factors determine the degree of training stimulus needed for
adaptation. We all know that an untrained person can go walk for 30
minutes and get some sort of training effect, while it is unlikely that would
produce any effect for a well-trained runner besides possibly enhancing
recovery. Training state must matter then. This effect can be seen on the
genetic level, as research by McConnel found that AMPK activity, which
is one of the signaling pathways discussed later, increased by 9-fold after
2 hours of cycling in untrained people, but after the subjects completed 10
training sessions, AMPK activity did not increase after the same amount
of exercise (2005). This demonstrates the importance of what a person is
accustomed to in training. A larger stimulus is required to disturb
homeostasis. In addition to training state, the physiological makeup of the
person and their nutritional state determines the effects of the training
stimulus. An example of this effect is seen when runners take some sort of
--- PAGE 201 ---
carbohydrate during a run versus taking nothing. The carbohydrate
changes the subsequent signaling pathway response entirely.
 
Messengers
Once the stimulus is provided, they create a disturbance in the body.
If enough disturbance occurs, a change in homeostasis can occur via
numerous mechanisms ranging from changes in fuel levels to the buildup
of various products in the muscle. These alterations in physiological
parameters act as messengers. When these messengers reach a critical
level they act as triggers to the various signaling pathways. It’s best to
think of the messenger’s role as being like a type of alarm. Whenever
there is a large change in a messenger, it’s as if an alarm goes off that
triggers action. In this case, the action is to activate subsequent pathways.
The messengers act to tell the body that homeostasis has been disturbed
and that action should be taken to fix that problem. It is our body’s safety
net and tells the body that repair and strengthening need to occur. It would
be no different than having an alarm for a leak in pipes in a power plant. If
the alarm went off, we would know that we need to get in there and repair
or replace the leaky pipe so that it doesn’t happen again. Thus, most of the
messengers are triggered either by depletion or too high of a buildup of
certain substances or by drastic changes in the ratio of substances.
These signaling events are important for both coaches and scientists,
as knowing what events need to happen to trigger adaptation allows for
the manipulation of training to try to accomplish this. These messengers
are what must change in order to get adaptation. They are our workout’s
targets on a physiological level. With that in mind, the following is a list
of the messengers that have currently been discovered, and the signaling
pathways that they trigger. This is an ever growing field, so this list is not
comprehensive:
--- PAGE 202 ---
MAPK=Mitogen activated protein kinase IGF-Insulin Like Growth Factor
PI3-k= Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
CaMK=Calcium/Calmodulin pathway
 
Signal Pathways
Once homeostasis has been disturbed significantly enough, the
messengers activate various signaling pathways. Signaling pathways are
basically the steps taken to initiate adaptation. In order to proceed to the
step of functional adaptation, these pathways must be activated. In our
analogy, the pathways represent the response to that alarm and the
protocol that has to be followed to ensure that next time the same thing
happens the alarm won’t go off again. The signaling pathways are like the
collecting of the materials needed to fix the problem. Then, the next step
of genetic adaptation is the process of using the materials collected to
build our final product that will ensure the alarm doesn’t go off.
The signaling pathways consist of a series of reactions and steps that
ultimately result in some sort of gene expression. Essentially it creates the
blueprint for functional adaptations. The exact steps differ with each
pathway. It is this gene expression that ultimately leads to the functional
changes and will be discussed next; some of the better-researched
pathways will be discussed as well as what functional changes are the
results of these pathways.
 
--- PAGE 203 ---
MAPK-
mitogen-activated protein kinase
PGC-1=peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor gamma coactivator C
CaMK=Calcium/Calmodulin pathway
 
Genetic Adaptation
While each signaling pathway differs, most work by increasing gene
expression. As mentioned earlier, think of the pathways as collecting the
material, and the step of genetic adaptation as building the final project.
The building process is accomplished first by transcription. Transcription
is the process of copying a string of DNA into mRNA. This gives us the
blueprint of what we want to build. mRNA can then go through the
process of translation. Just like it sounds, translation is taking all that
information that we copied and translating it (or it may be better thought
of as assembling it) into a nice usable package. Translation turns the
mRNA into a protein. In regards to training, the protein formation is often
the step that results in some sort of functional adaptation. For example,
mitochondria biogenesis will improve endurance via several mechanisms.
It is important to note that I have only mentioned the pathways that
we know a good deal about right now. It is likely that there are many other
pathways through which adaptation occurs. The important take away is to
learn how adaptation works. This allows you to design training based on
the desired outcome. You do not need to know the specifics to apply this
concept. Look at the glycogen depletion example. Just use logic and a
good training workout can be deduced. If the marathon is an event that is
dependent on the optimal fuel use ratio between carbohydrates and fats,
how do we signal the body to change that ratio so that there is more
reliance on fat. We need to “embarrass” it and send the signal that more fat
--- PAGE 204 ---
needs to be used. How do you do that? Simple, by running a workout that
depletes the glycogen stores to a significant enough amount that the body
adapts to make sure that it does not run low on glycogen the next time. It
accomplishes this by increasing the use of fat as a fuel and/or increasing
glycogen stores. This example just took you through the process of
adaptation without mentioning a single complex name. Use this technique
to design solutions for to how to train for the upcoming race.
 
Long Term Adaptation
Until now, we have focused on just one training session, but that is
seldom how it works in the real world, and in reality one training session
is not going to be enough to elicit much adaptation. Following a single
bout of training, mRNA levels increase and peak between 3-12 hours post
exercise. The levels will remain elevated until around 24hrs post workout
(Coffey & Hawley, 2007). With each increase in mRNA, a new level of
protein synthesis is reached. So, while mRNA levels may fall back to
resting levels after a day, the proteins that are created in this process
remain elevated for much longer periods of time. For example,
mitochondria protein turnover half-life is about 1 week. As mRNA levels
return to baseline, protein levels level off. With each subsequent training
stimulus that increases mRNA levels, the protein amounts are increased to
a new level. Therefore, for long term training adaptation to occur, repeated
bouts of exercise are needed to increase mRNA levels and continually
keep progressing protein levels to the next level. If there is too long of a
gap between training bouts, protein levels can potentially fall to the
preceding level, and thus detraining occurs. This information helps
explain why we need maintenance doses of workouts aimed at the variety
of parameters to ensure that we don’t go into a detraining state.
 
Training Applications
Although the study of signaling pathways is relatively new, we are
starting to understand the training that affects these pathways. As
previously mentioned, low glycogen training has been validated in the
research recently. The idea is to train low, compete high, or, in other
words, do some training in a low glycogen state, while competing fully
--- PAGE 205 ---
stocked with glycogen. In events like the marathon, this approach would
seem to enhance performance. Once again, the research knowledge is
behind the coaches and is simply explaining a phenomenon known for
years in training. As far back as the 1950’s, Ernst Van Aaken coached
several elite marathoners who would practice low glycogen strategies by
doing doubles without eating in between or doing long runs with no
supplemental food. The fact is that often coaches figure out what works in
training and then the scientists come in later and explain why it works.
Where the study of signaling pathways really contributes to the
practical world is in its demonstration of why the never ending debate of
volume or intensity is not an either/or situation. The AMPK and Calcium-
Calmodulin pathways both ultimately result in an increase in mitochondria
development. What is interesting is that the AMPK pathway seems to be
highly activated by short intense workouts such as 30sec sprints, while the
Calcium-Calmodulin pathway is activated by prolonged endurance
exercise (Laursen, 2004). What this demonstrates is that there are multiple
ways to get the same adaptation. Two entirely different workouts activate
two different pathways that give the same result. That explains why
runners in particular need a wide variety of training stimuli. It also could
explain why athletes who switch coaches from one emphasizing lots of
long steady running to one emphasizing high intensity lower volume, or
vice versa, seem to have breakthroughs for the first year before stagnating.
Perhaps the mitochondria increases of one pathway are near maxed out,
and when there is a dramatic change in training, the other pathway has
more adaptation potential.
These signaling pathways do not work in isolation. They can
interact, and this may partially explain why strength gains are affected by
endurance training. In particular the mTOR pathway seems to interact
with the AMPK pathway. In looking at these two pathways, the main
interaction explains why it is harder to gain strength while doing
endurance training than it is to gain endurance while strength training. The
AMPK pathway inhibits the mTOR pathway thus inhibiting protein
synthesis. The inhibitory effect explains the interference effect between
the two types of training.
--- PAGE 206 ---
 
The EPO Example
To demonstrate how the process of adaptation, signaling, and
genetic response works in full, I’ll briefly take you through the process of
how altitude increases EPO production and ultimately red blood cells.
To set some hypothetical parameters, we will look at a moderately
intense aerobic training stimulus (done around the lactate threshold) in a
hypoxic environment. Going to a hypoxic environment, whether natural or
artificial, puts a new stress on the body causing the various systems of the
body to react and adapt to its new environment. Training, even at sea
level, similarly causes numerous changes to occur within the body as it
attempts to react to the stress of the particular training load. Therefore,
when exercising at altitude, the body not only has to respond and adapt to
one stimulus, it has to respond to two, a training and hypoxic one. When
these two stressors combine, the body’s primary objective becomes
ensuring adequate oxygen delivery to the working muscles. It
accomplishes this through a variety of mechanisms.
First, let’s look at some of the larger changes that occur when
training in a hypoxic environment. Two main factors will determine the
physiologic and metabolic response: the intensity of the exercise and the
level of hypoxia. Both of these factors will affect the amount of oxygen
delivered to the muscles through a variety of factors. The level of hypoxia
will first affect the hemoglobin oxygen saturation due to the decrease in
the pressure gradient that occurs because of the reduction in the partial
pressure of oxygen at altitude (Rusko, 2004). This greatly affects VO2max
as each 1% drop in oxygen saturation below 95% decreases VO2max by
1-2% (Dempsey and Wagner, 1999). This drop in oxygen saturation even
--- PAGE 207 ---
occurs at moderate to low intensities, as was demonstrated in well-trained
athletes seeing drops even when training at 60-85% VO2max (Peltonen
1999). The drop in oxygen saturation is linearly related to the drop in
maximal heart rate that occurs at altitude (Rusko 2004). Due to this drop
in HR max, cardiac output is reduced at altitude.
The nervous system also plays a role in controlling the response to
hypoxic conditions. Due to the decrease in oxygen concentration, muscle
activity is reduced in hypoxic conditions (Peltonen, 1997). This reduction
in muscle recruitment may be a way of the CNS governing performance.
It has been suggested that the decrease in VO2max at altitude is the result
of the CNS controlling exercise, instead of the decreased recruitment
being a cause of the reduction in VO2max (Noakes et al., 2001). What the
exact controlling mechanism of the response of the CNS to hypoxic
conditions is remains unknown, but the CNS does play a role in the
overall response to training in hypoxic conditions.
All of these changes that occur while training in hypoxic conditions
lead to an eventual decrease in oxygen levels in the blood, and a decrease
in the muscles themselves. This reduction in oxygen concentration in the
blood and at the muscular level is the stimulus for the mechanisms behind
our eventual desired outcome, an increase in RBC mass. A reduction in
oxygen concentration of the blood activates the Hypoxia Inducible Factor-
1 (HIF-1) pathway in tissues where EPO production can take place (i.e.,
kidney, liver, and the brain) (Stockmann et al. 2006).
HIF-1 is a main oxygen homeostasis regulator in the body. Two
subunits, HIF-1α and HIF-1β, make up the HIF-1 complex. Under normal
conditions, HIF-1β is present, but HIF-1α is constantly being degraded by
the proteasome (Dery, 2005). When oxygen levels are lowered, the
degradation of HIF-1α is inhibited and HIF-1α stabilizes. The stabilization
allows for HIF-1α to bind to transcriptional coactivators and enter the
nucleus of the cell. Here, HIF-1α binds to HIF-1β, forming an HIF-1
transcriptional complex (Marzo et al., 2008). This HIF-1 complex then
binds to the Hypoxia Response Element (HRE) on the EPO gene. This in
turn leads to EPO expression (Stockmann et al., 2006).
EPO then needs to be transported to and bind with EPO receptors.
EPO receptors can be found on erythroid stem cells in bone marrow
(Marzo et al., 2008). The binding to the receptor on the cell membrane
--- PAGE 208 ---
results in a signaling cascade that results in the activation of the
transcription factor STAT-5 and two enzymes, PI3K and MAPK. These
enter the nucleus and induce transcription of specific genes that result in
the inhibition of apoptosis, programmed cell destruction (Marzo et al.,
2008; Jelkmann, 2004). The end result is that this prevention of
destruction of developing RBC results in an increase in RBC.
A larger RBC mass means a larger oxygen carrying capacity, which
ultimately results in increased oxygen delivery to the muscles. Oxygen
delivery has been shown to be a major limiter of VO2max (Bassett &
Howley, 2000). In studies done on blood transfusion of RBC in elite
endurance athletes, increases in endurance performance and in some cases
VO2max have been significant (Calbet et al., 2006). In one particular
study done on elite athletes with an average VO2max of 80 ml kg−1
min−1, time to exhaustion in an endurance test and VO2max were both
significantly increased (Buick et al., 1980). Therefore, increased oxygen
delivery results in increased aerobic capacity and the functional change of
improved endurance.
This leads to the reasoning behind the selection of the training
intensity. The idea behind the selection of a training intensity around
lactate threshold is due to our desired outcome. In order to elicit the
reduction in oxygen levels in the blood and muscles, the intensity needs to
be high enough that it will do this. As was stated earlier, Peltonen et al.
found that oxygen saturation was reduced at even sub maximal intensities
of between 60-85% of VO2max (1999). In well-trained individuals, this
intensity corresponds well to that of LT. Secondly, the intensity has to be
low enough to allow for a significant volume of training to take place. The
duration spent training has to be long enough to allow for activation of the
pathway responsible for the desired adaptations. The signaling of the HIF-
1 pathway under hypoxic conditions has been shown to already show
increases in HIF-1α in the first 2 minutes. However, maximum HIF-1α did
not occur until 1 hour of hypoxia, with max half times occurring at
between 12 and 13 minutes. In addition, the reduction of HIF-1α with
reoxygenation occurred quickly, also within 2 minutes, and was back to
normal within 32 minutes (Jewell, 2001). These results suggest that a
sufficient duration is necessary to elicit maximum gains via the HIF-1
pathway. Lastly, in a study by Zoll they found that training at an intensity
--- PAGE 209 ---
that corresponded to the ventilatory threshold increased mRNA
concentrations of the HIF-1α, giving credence to the theory discussed
above (2005).
In looking at the research and the pathways involved in EPO
production and RBC increase, it can be seen that in order for hypoxic
training to increase RBC mass a sufficient intensity and duration is
needed. The intensity must be high enough so that a drop in oxygen
saturation occurs, while being low enough so that sufficient time can be
spent training at that intensity for the pathway to be activated. In addition,
enough repeated bouts of this type of training are needed in order to
ensure that EPO synthesis achieves continued increase to new levels.
Without repeated bouts, it is likely that mRNA will return to baseline
levels, and EPO will quickly follow, thus not allowing for a sustained
increase in RBC.
--- PAGE 210 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 212 ---
10

--- PAGE 213 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 214 ---
Theories of Training Adaptation
“It is not the strongest or the most intelligent who will survive but
those who can best manage change.” Charles Darwin
 
The training of endurance athletes is a complex process that is not
entirely understood. Coaches of endurance athletes have generally taken
an approach of focusing on improving various physiological parameters, a
system based on tradition and trial and error, or a system based on race
pace being the central focus with various percentages of race pace used to
elicit different training adaptations. The wide variance in distance running
training is the result of a reliance on training methods passed on by
coaches that have been successful and skepticism of the science behind
training. Before delving into what the current models of training are, a
look at the volume of training done, the intensity of training, and the
distribution of the training load and how all of those affect physiological
parameters will give insight into what it takes to be a successful distance
runner.
 
General Adaptation Syndrome and Dose-
Response
Before analyzing the research done on the various ways to
manipulate training for increased performance, it is essential that the
overall process behind how the body responds to a stimulus and adapts be
discussed. Hans Selye’s General Adaptation Syndrome (G.A.S.) provides
the basis for the process that the body goes through to adapt to a stimulus,
regardless of whether it is training, an environmental stressor, or a
psychological stressor. In Selye’s original work, he provided a variety of
stressors to rats and found that despite the change in how the animals were
stressed, there response to the stressor followed a similar pattern. He saw
similar changes in the lymph nodes, adrenal glands, and a few other
systems, and this generalized response became the G.A.S. (Selye, 1978).
It consists of three distinct stages.
--- PAGE 215 ---
The first stage is the Alarm stage. This refers to the initial response
of the body to a stress where a lowering of resistance is seen and is often
classified as our “fight or flight” response. The next stage is the
Resistance stage, which consists of the body adapting to the stressor and
an increase of resistance to the stress. The last stage occurs if the stress is
continually applied and is the Exhaustion stage. In this stage, resistance to
the stress lowers considerably, and the body cannot respond effectively to
the stress (Selye, 1978 ).
Selye’s principle of adaptation can be applied to exercise training. In
popular exercise literature, the application of the G.A.S. is often referred
to as the principle of supercompensation (Bompa & Haff, 2008), which
provides a theoretical guideline for the response and adaptation to an
exercise stimulus. Similarly to Selye’s theory, when some sort of training
stimulus is applied, there is an initial alarm phase where fatigue occurs
and the performance level is decreased. Following this alarm stage, with
recovery, there is an adaptation phase where fatigue subsides and
adaptation takes place so that there is a supercompensation where
performance increases to a level above that which it was before the
training stimulus was applied. A new training stimulus can then be applied
to go through the process again. If too little recovery is allowed, then the
body never fully recovers or adapts and can enter Selye’s exhaustion
phase; this is what is commonly referred to as overtraining (Bompa &
Haff, 2008).
--- PAGE 216 ---
This model on stimulus and adaptation allows for the planning of
the work and recovery during the training process. Obviously, recovery is
needed to allow for adaptation during the resistance or adaptation phase,
without which the person would enter an overtraining phase. In addition, a
strong enough stimulus is needed to elicit adaptations, and on the other
hand the stimulus cannot be too intense, thereby lowering resistance to a
level that requires too much recovery time and does not result in an
adequate supercompensation. Thus assigning the correct intensity and
volume of a workout to elicit an optimal response is essential in proper
training.
The dose response relationship is another model that helps explain
the optimal load of a workout. The dose response relationship originates
from medicine and explains the interaction between the dose, the total
lode of a stimulus (i.e., intensity, volume, frequency), and the response, or
resulting training effect (Iwasaki et al., 2003). In looking at a typical dose-
response curve, it can be seen how the training dose affects the resulting
outcome. Too low of a load given will result in little or no adaptations, and
contrasting to that, too high of a load will give diminishing adaptations.
Busson created a model that showed that an inverted U-shape best
explained the optimal dose-response relationship between training and
performance (2003). The top of the inverted U demonstrated an optimal
dose of training, while either too little or too much training dose decreased
the effect on performance.
It is also important to consider what affects this relationship. Just as
a child needs less Advil than an adult for the same effect, a particular
individual will need more or less of a training stimulus depending on a
variety of factors. In doing research on large groups of participants it is
easy to sometimes forget this relationship. An individual will react
differently to a stimulus based on his physiological make up and his
training history, among other factors. This individual response is an often-
neglected parameter when discussing training dose and can shift the dose-
response curve. Manzi demonstrated this by showing that Autonomic
Nervous System parameters were dose related when accounting for the
individual training dose, instead of taking a group only approach which
had previously shown no relationship (2009). This can be seen in the
constant search for an optimal intensity or volume which can be seen in
--- PAGE 217 ---
both the popular literature, such as Arthur Lydiard’s proclamation of 100
mile weeks being optimal, or in research, such as the search for an optimal
training intensity, which seems to have varied between VO2max and
Lactate Threshold (Midgeley et al., 2006; Lydiard, 1998). The recognition
that each individual will respond differently to a stimulus, instead of
giving recommendations that appear to be a one size fits all
recommendation, would be one step towards closing the gap between
research and coaching in the sport of distance running.
 
Individuality of Adaptation
In a viewpoint article, Kainulainen points out the individuality of the
training response and the relative neglect of this phenomenon (2009). In
this article, the author points to a study by Vollaard that showed that while
on average improvements were seen in a variety of endurance parameters
after six weeks of endurance training, the individuality of the response
was widespread with some showing even negative responses to the
training, even though the training was the same for all individuals and
done as a percent of VO2max to provide some measure of individuality to
the training program (Vollaard et al., 2009; Kainulainen, 2009). The study
showed that there was a wide range of adaptation in maximal and sub
maximal tests including VO2 parameters, muscle enzyme activity, and
metabolite levels. Another interesting finding in the study is that low
responders for an increased VO2max were not low responders in other
parameters. This means that just because someone responded positively to
training in one parameter, it didn’t mean they’d respond positively in
others. The change in VO2max did not correlate with the change in
performance on a time trial, which is a significant finding demonstrating
that perhaps more attention should be paid to changing performance
instead of manipulating physiological parameters such as VO2max. One
has to question the training recommendations based on training designed
at improving parameters such as VO2max with the assumption being that
performance will improve because of it when studies show that change in
VO2max is often not linked to a change in performance. This
phenomenon of varied response is not new and can be seen in a wide array
--- PAGE 218 ---
of training situations, such as altitude training for example (Chapman et
al., 1998).
The individual response goes beyond short-term adaptation. In a
study by Gaskill they tested the yearly training model for 14 Cross
Country Skiers (1999). During the first year all skiers performed the same
kind of training that consisted of high volume training with only 16% of
the training being performed at or above LT. At the end of the year,
subjects were split between responders, those who showed the most
improvements, and non-responders. The responders trained the same way
the following year, while the non-responders slightly reduced their
training volume and increase the total intensity. Following the 2nd year,
the non-responders showed significant improvements in race times,
VO2max, and LT. The responders also showed similar continued
improvements in race times. These results point to the individual nature of
training adaptation and show that some subjects will thrive off of different
training stimuli. The mechanism behind this different response has not
been found yet. It is speculation, but a difference in the fiber type
distribution and strength of aerobic and anaerobic capacities might explain
the different reactions to training. Perhaps an individual with a tendency
towards more FT fibers responds better to higher intensity training that
recruits those muscle fibers. Similarly, an athlete with a predominance of
ST fibers might respond better to more volume.
The neglect of the importance of the individual dose-response
relationship could be of consequence when trying to determine the effects
of various training modalities. Furthermore, as pointed out by
Kainulainen, perhaps the problem is the standardization of training paces
as percents of VO2max. The aerobic and anaerobic contribution at a fixed
percent of VO2max can vary widely from individual to individual, as can
be seen in the fact that the Lactate Threshold can occur at a range of
percent VO2max (Brooks et al., 2004). Similarly, in the Vollaard study
there was a 40-fold range for increase in lactate levels at 70% VO2max,
showing the wide individual range of response to the exercise stimulus
(2009). They acknowledged this point and suggested standardization on
parameters that more directly affect power output. In practical terms for
trained distance runners, it probably makes more sense to standardize
--- PAGE 219 ---
paces in relation to their recent race performances or based on percentages
of goal race pace in well-trained runners.
 
--- PAGE 220 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 222 ---
11

--- PAGE 223 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 224 ---
Volume and Intensity of Training
 “Western societies are taught to avoid and fear fatigue. Everything
we do is geared towards avoiding fatigue in society.” Renato Canova
 
While the second half of this book is devoted to training, as a coach
it is important to understand what the scientific research says about
training and more importantly to answer the question as to why what it
says is different from what most coaches recommend. In this chapter,
we’ll explore the two different viewpoints on volume and intensity of
training and see if we can make some practical sense out of the two
contrasting views.
 
Volume of Training
The volume of training is generally quantified as miles per week
ran. How much is needed to optimize performance has been a source of
great debate in popular distance running training for many years.
Following World War II, the contemporary training was based on a lower
mileage higher intensity training program, which can be seen in the
training of Gerschler and Franz Stampfl. It was not until the late 1950’s,
early 1960’s that the volume of training became a focal point. With the
success of Arthur Lydiard’s athletes, typical training volumes that eclipsed
100 miles per week (mpw) quickly became the norm (Lydiard, 1998). Up
until the early 1980’s, high mileage was predominant among the elite
distance runners of the world. In the 80’s and early 90’s, a new line of
thinking focused on moderate mileage (~50-70mpw) with more high
intensity work gained popularity. This was led by the British coaches Peter
Coe (with his success in coaching his son Seb Coe) and Frank Horwill
(Coe & Martin, 1997). The rise of sports science during this period of time
also seems to have led to the emphasis on higher intensity work with
lower volume. While Coe and others had success with this approach, the
dearth of American distance running success on the world level during the
90’s is sometimes blamed on this change in emphasis.
With the rise of Kenyan and Ethiopian distance runners, ideas on
training volume shifted again towards higher mileage totals. The East
--- PAGE 225 ---
African runners demonstrated that relatively high volumes of training
might be necessary for reaching the levels that they were at. Some authors
have speculated that East African runners are actually in the moderate
volume, high intensity line of training, but this neglects the popular
literature and more importantly the scholarly literature on the subject
(Berg, 2003). Billat found that East African runners in their classified Low
Speed Training group averaged 172km per week, while high speed
runners averaged 158km per week (2003). Both of these values are
substantially higher than the values done by lower mileage programs such
as Coe’s. In addition, these values were recorded while the subjects were
in racing season, which is not the period of highest volume. Therefore, the
idea that East African runners are of the lower volume model is not
substantiated. Lastly, training programs by authors who have coached elite
Kenyan runners also demonstrate that they take a relatively high volume
approach (Canova & Arceli, 1999). One important note is that their
intensity is also fairly high, and in this author’s opinion, much higher than
the higher volume programs of the 1960’s and 70’s; perhaps this is due to
their large volume of running and activity during their childhood. This
could potentially allow for them to handle higher intensities while still
maintaining higher volumes. While examining the historical volumes of
training of elite runners gives us an idea of what might be best, the
question is what does research say about volume of training?
There have been a few studies that have tried to determine the
impact of training volume on performance and physiological factors.
Daniels found no change in VO2max while increasing training from 20-
30km/wk to 50-70km/wk (Daniels, 1978). Similarly, a study by Costill
comparing changes in VO2max with two marathon runners coming back
to training after a 6-month layoff, VO2max increased progressively as
mileage increased up until ~100mpw, while further increases in mileage,
all the way up to 200 mpw, resulted in no further changes in VO2max
(Costill & Trappe, 2002). The fact that VO2max does not seem to change
after a certain amount of mpw is sometimes cited as a reason that higher
mileage is not needed. However, it is important to remember that VO2max
is not the be all and end all and does not accurately reflect performance.
Two studies have shown that with increases in mileage performance was
improved even with no change in VO2max (Costill, 1967; Daniels, 1978).
--- PAGE 226 ---
Two different studies have also looked at the relationship between
the amount of training done and Running Economy (RE). Theoretically,
one adaptation that could occur with a large volume of running is an
increase in RE due to increased efficiency, both mechanical and
metabolic, because of the repetitive nature of running. In a comparison of
a spectrum of runners spanning from untrained to elite, the findings
suggest that high volumes of running could increase RE (Costill, 1967).
Similarly, Mayhew found that the number of years running significantly
correlated with RE (1977). Contradicting this data, Pate did not find a
correlation between RE and training volume (1992). The connection
between RE and volume of training remains inconclusive.
Lastly, it’s important to recognize the limitations of research studies
on the impact that volume of training has. Many of the adaptations that
may occur due to increases in volume may take longer than the couple of
weeks that most studies last. For instance, a longitudinal study by Rusko
found that after 8 years of training and a doubling of training volume, the
percentage of ST fibers in a group of Cross-Country Skiers increased by
11% (1992). While obviously not solely due to the volume increase, these
changes show the long-term adaptations that take place in endurance
athletes. Another study by Fiskerstrand and Seiler found that the
performance changes (+10%) in world class rowers from 1970 to 2001
occurred not with an increase in intensity of training but with an increase
in volume of easy training (2004). The amount of low intensity training
per week increased from 30hrs to 50hrs per week, while the amount of
supra-maximal training decreased from 30hrs to 7hrs per week. The lack
of longitudinal studies prevents making any research based
recommendations on what the ideal volume of training is for distance
runners.
 
Intensity of Training
While volume of training is often the first factor most think of,
intensity of training plays just as important of a role. Distance runners
typically perform several higher intensity workouts per week, which are
separated with easier runs. The intensity of both the harder and easier runs
affects the adaptations that take place and lead to improved performance.
--- PAGE 227 ---
The intensities used range from easy jogging all the way up to sprinting.
There has been much research aimed at finding the effects of different
training intensities. Most of these studies separate training intensities into
sub maximal, LT, VO2max, and supramaximal training. While the efficacy
of separating training into zones is debatable, we will look at the effects of
training at these various intensities for the sole reason that this is how
most of the research splits the training up.
In general, the knowledge of what intensity to train at is in the dark
ages as far as research goes. This is definitely one area where coaches
appear to be ahead of the scientists. Given that fact, I will lightly touch on
some of the pertinent research done on training at various intensities and
then give a brief overview of a practical approach to assigning training
intensities.
 
Lactate Threshold
For distance runners, training at or around LT has risen in
importance in recent years. This is partly due to a few different reasons.
First, the observation that VO2max does not seem to change in elite
athletes, yet performance and LT continues to improve (Legaz Arrese et
al., 2005). Second, advances in measuring lactate threshold meant more
research came out showing the effects of training on that parameter. Once
again, since we could measure it, it gained significance. For these reasons,
training at LT has become en vogue.
For recreationally trained runners, training at around the threshold
seems to impact LT, RE, and VO2max. Four different studies with
recreational athletes found that adding between 1 and 6 LT type sessions
per week increased VO2max by between 2.5-8.1% after 6-8 weeks of
training. In addition, two studies measured changes in LT and found that it
increased by 3.3% and 10.7% respectively. It is worth noting that the
10.7% increase was seen when 6 sessions of LT training were done per
week, while the other study added two such sessions per week. Lastly,
improvements in RE were measured and seen in two studies with
improvements of both 1.8% and 3.1% (Billat et al. 2004; Franch et al.,
1998; Hoffman et al., 1999; Yoshida et al., 1990).
--- PAGE 228 ---
While the improvements in all three variables are impressive, we
should expect the novel and somewhat stressful stimulus of threshold
work to improve runners. The question becomes what happens in well-
trained runners? Acevedo and Goldfarb investigated adding training
sessions at an intensity near LT in well-trained runners (average
VO2max=65.3 ml/kg/min). The added training sessions resulted in a
nonsignificant improvement in VO2max of 0.7% but a significant increase
in LT of 5.1%. In addition, performance in a 10k race improved by 3.1%
(1989). In an interesting study Jemma found that after 3 weeks of interval
training at an intensity that usually corresponds with LT (~85%VO2max),
performance over a 40km time trial in well-trained cyclists was improved
(2005). They measured EMG changes and found that the performance
improvements could have been due to changes in muscle recruitment.
This improvement in LT and performance without an increase in
VO2max is consistent with the idea that VO2max seldom changes in well-
trained athletes and performance improvements come from other factors.
The changes in EMG found during the Jemma study are interesting and
point to the notion that factors outside the traditional endurance
performance model need to be considered when conducting training
studies.
 
VO2max
Many studies have focused on training at around the velocity of
VO2max. The belief is that spending time at VO2max may help increase
VO2max or stress the aerobic capacity maximally, thus serving as the
most effective stimulus for adaptations. There have been numerous
research studies on the effects of training on VO2max. In untrained
subjects, training at or near VO2max increases VO2max (Berg, 2003). In
two separate studies, adding intervals at or around vVO2max in
recreational trained athletes increased VO2max by 5.0% and 6.0%, and
RE by 2% and 3% (Franch et al., 1998; Smith et al., 2003).
In well-trained athletes, as previously mentioned, changes in
VO2max are rare, as can be seen by a study by Legaz Arrese which found
improvements in performance without changes in VO2max in elite
runners (2005). Several specific studies have been done on a variety of
--- PAGE 229 ---
interval training programs at the velocity at VO2max (vVO2) in well-
trained runners. Out of four studies that tracked changes in VO2max, only
one study found any significant changes in VO2max. Three of these
studies showed improvements in performance, with one showing no
change. Only one study measured changes in RE, and it showed an
improvement. Lastly, two showed an improvement in vVO2, while two
showed no change (Acevedo & Goldfarb, 1989; Smith et al., 1999; Billat
et al., 2002; Billat et al., 1999). The data on training at vVO2 remains
inconclusive on a number of levels. Performance seems to improve the
majority of the time, while the exact mechanism of this performance
improvement is unknown. Since only one study measured changes in RE
and those were positive, it is possible that this could be the main benefit.
The Jemma et al. study also points to the idea that neuromuscular changes
such as altered recruitment pattern could play a role in alteration in
performance during high intensity training (2005). Even though the
training is generally termed VO2max training since it corresponds with
that parameter, it should be remembered that training at that intensity will
result in adaptations other than those related to VO2max.
 
Supramaximal Training
 Training at speed faster than vVO2max has been shown to improve
endurance performance. It is possible that this occurs through several
mechanisms. Training at speeds faster than VO2max could potentially
alter many of the previously discussed anaerobic and neural factors that
impact endurance performance. In addition, faster training could have an
impact on the traditional factors in performance: VO2max, LT, and RE.
There have been a limited number of studies with supramaximal
training involving runners only. The limited number of studies involved
recreationally or moderately trained individuals. Two different studies
found contrasting results. In a study by Franch, they had participants do
intervals at 132% vVO2 and found a significant increase in VO2max of
3.6% and a nonsignificant increase in RE of .9 (1998).On the other hand
Bickham found that doing sprint intervals at 90-100% perceived
maximum effort increased time to exhaustion at 110%VO2max and
decreased VO2max by a nonsignificant 2.2% (2006). Interestingly, this
--- PAGE 230 ---
study showed an increase in MCT1, which, as mentioned earlier, may play
a role in assisting with the oxidation of lactate. These results point to the
need for more studies on supramaximal training in distance runners and
the measurement of more variables that may impact performance.
It is possible that supramaximal training could induce changes that
could negatively affect distance running performance. High intensity
interval training could elicit Glycolytic adaptations that could impair
aerobic processes. In several studies using very intense interval training,
increases in lactate production and the enzymes PFK and LDH have been
found (Billat, 2001). As mentioned in the LT section, an increase in lactate
production, and an increase in LDH, which could represent more pyruvate
being converted to lactate, could alter the balance between lactate
production and clearance. This in turn would negatively impact LT. The
degree to which this theoretical argument holds up in well-trained runners
needs to be investigated, because it is likely that in untrained subjects any
sort of training stimulus that had some aerobic component would improve
LT.
Cycling studies provide us some clue of the general effects of such
training on endurance performance. Several studies have looked at the
impact of supramaximal intervals of 30-60sec in length. Laursen found an
improvement in power output by 5.3% over a 40km time trial after 4
weeks of interval training, an increase in power following an incremental
test (+4.0%), and an increase in VO2max by 2.2% (2002b). Stepto found
an increase in power over the 40km distance by 3.4% without a significant
change in VO2max (-0.6%) (1999). In another study, Laursen found an
increase in power by 5.7% at Ventilatory Threshold (VT), which closely
relates to LT, an increase in maximum power attained in the step test
(+4.7%), and an increase in VO2max by 3.5% following four weeks of
training (2002a). Finally, in a study by Creer, EMG measurements were
taken before and after 4 weeks of interval training to assess neural factors
(2004). They saw significant increases in peak power and VO2max, as
well as an increase in EMG readings showing increased motor unit
activation.
The cycling studies all point towards improved performance
following the addition of supramaximal training. The exact mechanisms
for these improvements vary with each study. The measured increases in
--- PAGE 231 ---
maximum power in the Laursen studies, combined with the Creer study
measuring increased motor unit activation, could lend credence to the idea
that neural adaptations may be the main reason that supramaximal training
improves performance in endurance athletes. In addition, if Noakes CGM
is taken into consideration the increase in VO2max seen in relatively
untrained individuals after supramaximal training could be a result of
increased muscle activation.
Training at speeds faster than VO2max is a regular part of most
distance runners training, yet there is a lack of information regarding its
effects on well-trained runners. This is probably due to the heavy
emphasis on training at VO2max and LT. That emphasis is likely due to
the fact that those quantities are easily measured and provide points of
reference. Cycling studies help show that other factors besides these may
be the true mechanisms responsible for why supramaximal training
improves performance. More running specific research is needed on this
topic to discern the exact mechanisms.
 
Interaction of Volume and Intensity of
Training
In the research literature there has been a trend towards the
recommendation of high intensity versus high volume training (Berg,
2003). This is likely a result of the short-term nature of research studies.
Given the changes that occur with high intensity versus lower intensity
and longer duration training, it is not surprising that high intensity training
shows greater benefits over only the standard 6 week timeframe of most
training studies. This has led to the conclusion that high intensity training
is preferential over higher volume to reach the same adaptations.
However, it is questionable whether this preference has merit. Seiler and
Tønnessen found that elite endurance training consists of about 85% of the
training being performed at low to moderate intensities in several different
groups of elite endurance athletes (2009). Regardless of whether their
sport was cycling, running, cross-country skiing, or a similarly aerobically
demanding sport, the amount of light activity was very high. Furthermore,
they point out that elite training is more likely to represent optimum
--- PAGE 232 ---
training than what is demonstrated in the lab setting because of a likely
evolutionary process of training by elites.
Contrasting with the research theory, Esteve-Lanao demonstrated
that it was the amount of easy running that impacted running performance
over a 10km race not the amount of high intensity training (2007). The
experience of elite endurance athletes also contradicts the research
findings that high intensity, low volume training is optimal. As pointed out
already it seems that the best runners combine a higher volume of training
with some higher intensity training. Due to the high volume of training,
the large percentage is low intensity, but the absolute volume of relatively
high intensity training still reaches levels of 20mi or more per week (Billat
et al., 2003). In a paper by Laursen, he points out two key findings.  First,
without a background of high volume training, high intensity training can
maintain but seldom improve performance (2009). Second, while the
adaptations of high intensity and high volume training may be similar,
they may occur via two different pathways. Most of the training studies
manipulating intensity of training add high intensity work to an athlete’s
training schedule who has been doing a large volume of low intensity
training. This approach where high volume training must precede high
intensity training is fundamental in popular literature on distance running,
but it is neglected in the research. What we are left with in most research
then is taking someone who has a base of endurance and adding some
high intensity training. Should we really wonder why they improve with
that periodization model?
The idea that high intensity training is more beneficial when
preceded by a base has been around since the days of Arthur Lydiard. In a
study by Quinn, two different groups performed either continuous exercise
or interval training for 12 weeks (2002). At the end of the 12 weeks, the
groups switched, so that the continuous group now did 12 weeks of
interval training. It was found that the group that did continuous and then
interval training improved significantly more in terms of time to
exhaustion (15% to 5.3%) and VO2max (7.4% to 3.6%) than the group
that did interval and then continuous training. While this shouldn’t
surprise any coaches, the finding supports the idea that a base of moderate
work needs to be established before intense training is done in order to
achieve maximum benefits. This could also explain why in most studies
--- PAGE 233 ---
that simply replace a portion of the low to moderate training in their
subjects’ routine with high intensity training, performance is improved by
so much. This interaction of prior training’s impact on training during a
study should be taken into consideration when evaluating study results.
According to Laursen, high volume training may signal for
adaptations through the calcium-calmodulin pathway because of the
increase in intramuscular calcium seen in long duration, high volume
training (2004). In contrast to this, high intensity training may signal
adaptations through the adenosine monophosphate kinase (AMPK)
pathway because of the increase in AMP seen following high intensity
training. Both of these pathways eventually lead to PGC-1α, which is a
transcriptional cofactor that will result in the typical adaptations seen in
endurance athletes such as mitochondria biogenesis (Laursen, 2004).
Laursen thus concludes that there are two very different ways to achieve
similar adaptations. This points to the idea that to maximize these
adaptations both stimuli are likely needed as one pathway may be more
difficult to activate than the other depending on the individual and their
training status.
In conclusion, it is likely the disparity between the time course of
changes and the length of the research studies that is creating this
discrepancy between real world recommendations and the findings in the
lab. High intensity training is likely to show quick adaptations, explaining
its greater impact on performance within a short period of time. The long-
term effect of repeated high intensity training is not something that has
been researched in the literature. The experience of coaches points to a
long block of high intensity training leading to decreased performance,
mostly likely due to overtraining (Lydiard, 1998).
 
Training in the Real World
While studies on training are interesting, they should be taken with a
grain of salt. In research we have to isolate one variable to see its effect. In
the real world, variables are never isolated. This creates a situation where
training in the lab is completely different than training in the real world.
The training effect is the result of a combination of all of the training
stimuli applied to the athlete.
--- PAGE 234 ---
Research on concurrent endurance and strength training has
demonstrated this effect by showing that the genetic adaptation that occurs
is partially dependent on whether the strength or endurance training was
done last during the day’s training. This is but one example of the limits of
research-based endurance training. Another problem is that the research
looks at averages and everyone as a group, while a coach has to look at
people as individuals. This creates a situation where researchers are
looking for the magic workout or training intensity that improves
performance on average. It does not exist.
In the real world, we know that training cannot be classified into
easily manageable zones. Yes, certain workouts will have a greater effect
aerobically or anaerobically, but as discussed previously an individual’s
reaction to training will vary drastically. This might partially explain the
drastic difference in opinion of optimal training between most Scientists
and most coaches. The scientist viewpoint has been explained in detail, so
a brief counterpoint of the coaches’ viewpoint on intensity of training is in
order.
From a coaching standpoint, there should be no zones of training.
All paces are connected in some way and elicit slightly different
adaptations. The central premise of deciding training intensity should
depend primarily on two factors, the race distance the individual is aiming
for and the individual makeup of the runner. The race distance and goal
pace should give the coach a pace that can be defined as specific. From
this pace, as we get faster or slower, the intensity becomes more general,
all the way out to the extremes of jogging or full out sprinting.
Generally, coaches start with using very general training, on both
sides of faster/slower spectrum, and work towards specificity. Further
details on this are discussed below in the periodization section. The key
difference is that all the intensities build upon each other or, in other
words, are supported by each other. The term base is often used and
applies to this idea. A base of easy aerobic running needs to be established
before more intense aerobic running can be done. Similarly, a base of pure
speed and muscle fiber recruitment provides the foundation for slightly
slower but longer work. The goal of training is to use both sides of the
spectrum to increase the speed that you can handle over a specific distance
--- PAGE 235 ---
or, in other words, to extend the length of time you can run at your goal
pace until it reaches the full race distance.
The workouts themselves are not done in the way that most research
based workouts are in that you run a single set of repeats at a given pace.
Instead there is mixing of intensities for a desired goal. Workouts also
have built in progression to take the athlete to the next adaptation level by
manipulating pace, intensity, rest interval, etc.
This is a very brief and general overview of the training process
from a coach’s standpoint, and just one of many theories. The key
differences between research designs and real world training can be
summed up with the idea that research is looking for the magic workout
and magic training intensity that enhances performance whereas coaches
use a large mixture of workouts at a variety of intensities to reach peak
performance. In addition, research is focused on the group average, while
coaches recognize the individuality of training.
 
Supplementary Training
Training that is not running specific also has been shown to improve
distance running performance (Jung, 2003). Resistance training and
plyometrics are the two types of training that are the most studied and
beneficial. Despite the evidence pointing towards performance benefits,
there has been a hesitation by many runners to include these types of
training. Part of this hesitation is due to the idea that resistance training
increases size and weight The belief that only VO2max, RE, and LT
impact running performance has also held back the acceptance of
supplemental training. However, as discussed already, it is now known
that anaerobic and neural factors contribute to success in distance running.
There are many different types of resistance training, which
complicates quantifying its effect on endurance performance. The types of
resistance training that will likely aid runners are those that do not result
in a significant increase in body weight and muscle size. A significant
increase in muscle size would result in a decrease of the capillary and
mitochondria density (Brooks et al., 2004). For these reasons, training that
focused on improving the neural and anaerobic factors that improve
distance running performance without a subsequent increase in weight or
--- PAGE 236 ---
size would be desirable. Following this idea, plyometrics and heavy
training are likely to be the best for endurance athletes.
The majority of studies using traditional weight lifting have shown
no change in VO2max in well-trained athletes (Jung, 2003). The studies
that have found a change in VO2max were on untrained subjects. For
example, on well-trained subjects, Hickson found no change in VO2max
when resistance training was added to cyclists training (1988). In trained
individuals it is unlikely that VO2 will be high enough to elicit a change in
VO2max. However, if one applies the theory of Noakes’ CGM, it is
possible that changes in VO2max following resistance training could be
attributed to changes in muscle activation which transfer to the task of
running. Of the traditional factors, RE and to a lesser extent LT appear to
be the most affected by resistance training.
RE seems to be the primary factor that is improved with this training.
Three studies using trained runners and replacing part of their training
with plyometric or explosive type training have shown improved RE,
while one study using heavy lifting demonstrated improved RE. Spurrs
found an improvement in 3k time along with an improvement in RE
following plyometric training (2003). Similarly, Saunders found that
following plyometric training improved RE by 4.1%. In addition,
neuromuscular factors were improved, such as decreased time to reach
maximal dynamic strength and increased average power during a
plyometric test (2006). Lastly, in well-trained runners, Paavolainen found
that following 9 weeks of plyometric type training, the runners improved
their 5k races by 3.1% and RE by 8.1% (1999). They also improved their
vMART, and that improvement significantly correlated with their
improvements in performance.
One study has been done on the effects of heavy weight lifting on
endurance performance. Millet studied the effects of 14 weeks of heavy
weight training on various parameters in triathletes. They found that RE,
maximal strength, and power during a hopping test were all significantly
increased (2002). Another study by Esteve-Lanao found that a periodized
resistance training program resulted in the maintenance of stride length
compared to a control group and a non-periodized resistance program
(2008). This study shows another potential benefit of resistance training.
--- PAGE 237 ---
These findings on the effects of plyometric and resistance training
lead to the idea that neural and anaerobic factors from strength training
could be responsible for performance improvements. As discussed in the
neuromuscular section, it is likely that changes in motor unit recruitment,
changes in anaerobic capacity, or alterations in ground contact time or
muscle-tendon stiffness could explain improvements in performance
following resistance training.
 
Training Frequency
How often runners train and the distribution of training intensities
across training are two other factors that are debated. In distance running,
it is accepted that well-trained runners train every day or at least six days
out of the week. This is needed to reach the higher volumes of training
that are done. One debate surrounds whether training once or twice per
day is most beneficial. There have even been reports of elite Kenyan
athletes running up to three times per day (Tanser, 2008). Billat found that
elite Kenyan runners trained between 10-14 times per week (2002).
To the author’s knowledge only one training study has been done
comparing training once versus twice per day in moderately trained
runners. In a study by Mostardi and Campbell they added a 7mi run to one
group’s training on 4 days per week, while the other group ran only once
per day continuing their daily regimen. After 4 weeks, no differences in
improvements in VO2max were found. However, VO2max was tested on
a bicycle ergometer, which may impact results since the participants were
track athletes and ran during their training. Both groups saw significant
improvements in mile time, but there were no differences between the
groups (1981). More research needs to be done on this topic as obviously
the research results conflict with the real world training suggestions.
Several theoretical arguments can be made for twice versus once per
day training, especially during in-season training. During in-season
training, a large bulk of the training of distance runners is used as recovery
or general aerobic running (Daniels, 2005). In well-trained runners, at this
point of the season, it is unlikely that a low training stimulus would elicit
further adaptations. It is possible that splitting these recovery runs into
doubles would further promote recovery while maintaining volume.
--- PAGE 238 ---
In theory, glycogen depletion could be minimized to a greater
degree than with one single run, as glycogen repletion would be easier to
achieve following two separate 5 mile runs instead of one 10mi run. Two
separate runs could lead to greater glycogen repletion due to a greater
window of insulin sensitivity following each run. Additionally, the
hormonal response of such hormones as Growth Hormone, which plays a
role in recovery and adaptation, could potentially be greater in two
separate runs instead of one longer run. Significant GH release in
endurance runs at low and moderate intensities occur in relatively short
runs (Gilbert et al., 2008). In addition, some researchers have suggested
that training in a fatigued state may enhance subsequent adaptations. It has
been found that training in a glycogen depleted state enhances gene
transcription of several markers of training adaptation (Yeo et al., 2008;
Hansen et al., 2005). In two studies on training every day versus training
twice every other day, increases in enzyme activity have been more
significantly increased in the twice every other day group. In the study by
Hansen, they used knee extensor exercises with one leg being trained
every day and the other twice every other day (2005). The twice every
other day leg showed significantly better time till exhaustion at the end of
the training, along with the increased enzyme activity. In the study by Yeo
and colleagues they compared two different groups using cycling as the
means of training (2008). In their study enzyme activity was higher in the
twice every other day group, but performance was equally increased in
both groups. More research needs to be done using study designs that
more accurately reflect the training done in the real world, meaning that
training once every day versus twice per day, even with equal volume,
should be researched instead of twice every other day.
In addition to the frequency of training done, the frequency of the
more intense workouts also plays a role. Recommendations in the popular
literature suggest that 2-3 intense workouts should be done per week
(Daniels, 2005). However, little research has been done on this subject
with runners. As will be discussed later, recovery plays a central role in
the adaptation process. Without adequate recovery, athletes could be
pushed into a state of overtraining or overreaching (Billat et al., 1999).
Therefore, finding the optimal distribution between low intensity and high
intensity workouts should be considered. In a study by Billat, they put this
--- PAGE 239 ---
to the test having subjects perform 3 low intensity workouts, 1 LT
workout, and one high intensity training (HIT) workout per week (1999).
They then increased the intensity of the training by having the subjects
perform 2 continuous, 3 HIT, and one LT workout per week. The subjects
did not show any further improvement with the increased density of hard
workouts and showed markers for overtraining. This study gives an idea
on the density of hard workouts that subjects can handle.
 
--- PAGE 240 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 242 ---
12

--- PAGE 243 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 244 ---
Periodization of Training
“Lots of things work. The question is, what’s the most practical and
efficient way to train for a certain task?” Again to Carthage
 
 How we plan and implement our training is of the utmost
importance for ensuring success. It is important to remember that
periodization does not refer to some exact method of training planning but
instead simply refers to how one goes about planning the training.
Training volume, intensity, and frequency are manipulated throughout a
season to bring about peak performance. There are numerous theories of
how to plan and manipulate training to bring runners to maximum
performance, yet there is no research testing any of these periodization
models. On the other hand, periodization is well studied in strength
training (ACSM 2009).
Periodization is the process of dividing the training into smaller
periods of training where the emphasis, or the target, of the training is
altered during each period. Generally a manipulation of the volume,
intensity, and frequency of workouts is done to bring a person to peak
performance. Traditionally, periodized training has been broken down into
several phases. The largest of these is a several year cycle that was
originally based on the 4-year cycle of Olympic athletes. Below this is the
Macrocycle, which consists of a period of training that lasts from months
to up to a year. The next level is that of the mesocycle which consists of
several weeks of training. A microcycle is the next phase that consists of
several days to a week or more of training. The last level is that of the
individual workout (Issurin, 2008).
Training can be periodized on several different levels. On a
microcycle level, the variation of volume and intensity of workouts on a
day-to-day basis is often done. In endurance training this often means the
alternation of harder workouts, those performed at intensities near or
above LT, with easier runs performed at relatively light intensities. In
popular coaching literature, there are many different theories on how to
manipulate training. It is generally accepted that harder days are followed
by one or two easier days before another hard day is repeated (Daniels,
2005; Hudson, 2008). There has been no research or studies that the
--- PAGE 245 ---
author is aware of that have investigated this manipulation of training on
the microcycle level. It is not known whether this alternation of hard and
easy training is optimal or whether some other manipulation is more
effective. This is one of the many research limitations in endurance sports.
One study on strength training clearly shows that altering what is done
each day is more effective for the development of strength than altering
only every 4 (Rhea et al., 2003).
On a larger scale of mesocycle and macrocycle level, debate
surrounds how to manipulate volume and intensity over the course of a
season. In endurance training, only one study has been done comparing
periodized training and non-periodized training. The study by
Soungatoulin found that after 16 weeks of training the periodized cyclists
performed significantly better in a time trial (2003).
The intricacies of periodization can be debated on many different
levels. Looking at a macrocycle level of training, the manipulation of
overall volume and intensity is often debated as volume and intensity are
inversely related (Bompa & Haff, 2008). Several contrasting views are
seen in the manipulation of these variables. The traditional approach,
emphasized by Arthur Lydiard, consisted of very high volumes of work
early in the season that consistently lowers as the season progresses with a
proportionate increase in intensity (Lydiard, 1998). In contrast to this
approach, Simmons has suggested an ever increasing total volume of
training with a corresponding steady increase in intensity (Simmons &
Freeman, 2006). There is no research to suggest how the volume and
intensity of training should progress on a macrocycle level, so we have to
mainly rely on how training has evolved in the real world.
Volume and intensity can be manipulated on a meso and microcyle
level too. Several different approaches to manipulating these variables are
seen in the popular literature and even in theoretical literature. Some
coaches subscribe to a consistent approach to volume in that within a
period, volume is kept relatively level from microcycle to microcycle
(Lydiard, 1998). In contrast to this, in other approaches volume is altered
every week with a high and then a low volume week of training. Another
approach is an escalating approach to volume where volume is increased
every week during a mesocycle. Some of these programs also institute the
inclusion of a down or recovery week where volume and/or intensity is
--- PAGE 246 ---
decreased to allow for adaptation (Bompa & Haff, 2008). This approach
makes sense in theory in regards to Hans Selye’s General Adaptation
Syndrome that explains the mechanisms behind stress and adaptation. In
theory, the down week would allow for recovery, adaptation, and
progression to a new level of resistance. How many weeks of higher
volume or escalating volume should be done before a down week is not
known. There has been no research done to investigate any of these
theories or ideas. This leaves the manipulation of volume on a mesocycle
level largely based on experience and trial and error.
How one should periodize the training to target specific adaptations
is also a source of debate (Issurin, 2008). The debate surrounds whether a
linear/block or non-linear/mixed periodization scheme is more beneficial.
In a linear/block periodization scheme, periods of training that are almost
solely devoted to developing a select few biomotor abilities, while work
on other abilities are kept to a minimum. The next period or block of
training would then shift its emphasis to a different biomotor ability to be
its focus. For example, during the first period of training, a several week
period may be spent doing exclusively endurance training. This may be
followed by a period of training done to develop high-end aerobic
endurance, and then by a period designed to develop speed endurance
(Bompa & Haff 2008).
 In a non-linear/mixed periodization scheme, the emphasis during
each period would change, but nothing would be almost entirely neglected
(Hudson, 2008). Essentially, in each period there would be an element of
endurance training, speed, speed endurance, etc.; only the emphasis on
each one would change. For example, during the first period of training,
endurance may be emphasized with lots of aerobic running, but a weekly
sprint session may be included. In a later period, speed training may be
more emphasized and thus a higher volume or frequency of that work is
done, but training focused on endurance would also be done, just not to
the degree it was done during the period when it was emphasized.
In regards to endurance training, the benefits are largely theoretical
and anecdotal. In resistance training one study has been done comparing
linear and nonlinear approaches. In a study by Monteiro nonlinear
periodization showed higher increases in strength and more consistent
increases in strength across a 12 week training period when compared to a
--- PAGE 247 ---
linear and a no periodization group (2009). In this study, three different
workout types, consisting of 3-4 sets of either 4-5 reps, 8-10 reps, or 12-
15 reps that were aimed at different adaptations were used. The periods of
training were split into 3 blocks of 4 weeks each. The linear group did all
3 sets of 12-15 reps the first period, then all 8-10 rep sets the second, and
finally all 4-5 rep sets the last. The non-linear group did two of the three
rep types each period, with it altering each period. The non periodization
group did solely 3 sets of 8-12 reps. While the design of this study was for
strength increases, it shows that a non-linear approach was more
consistent in strength increases after each period and produced greater
total increases, which both are criticisms of a non-linear approach (Issurin,
2008). No similar studies have been done using endurance training so
whether the results would be similar in endurance training is unknown,
but it does provide theoretical support for a non-linear approach of
training. This calls into question the merits of having a period of training
focused solely on one adaptation such as is seen in many endurance sports
where a large base period focuses only on steady aerobic running.
Periodization is a complex process that occurs on many different
levels. In looking at the coaching literature, the general periodization for
distance runners can be divided into down into two theoretical models.
The two models include a linear model and a funnel to specificity model.
 
 
Linear Periodization
--- PAGE 248 ---
The linear model is considered the classic approach to distance
training. It gained popularity and influence following the success of
Arthur Lydiard’s athletes in New Zealand. The Lydiard approach, which is
the basis for the linear approach, started with a several month period
called Marathon Conditioning where high volumes (~100mpw) of easy to
moderate running were done. In addition long tempo or fartlek sessions
were done during the end of this period. Following this phase, mileage
was decreased and the intensity was increased with a one month period
called Hill Resistance which focused on strength endurance by using a
variety of hill repeats and hill circuits. The next phase consisted of track
training, starting with longer intervals on the track (800’s, miles) and
progressively working towards shorter intervals (200’s and 400’s). This
was followed by a sharpening and peaking phase that consisted of shorter
faster work, such as 50m in and out sprints or an all out 200m, and a
further drop in volume (Wilt, 1964; Lydiard, 1998).
This method is still used today by many coaches. Greg McMillan,
coach of an elite training group in the U.S., characterizes his training as
going from Base to Stamina to Speed (Greg McMillan, personal
conversations). Similarly, Esteve-Lanau described the periodization used
by well-trained Spanish runners in their study as a type of linear
periodization (2005). While the traditional linear system consisted of a
large drop in volume, modern linear programs tend to have a more gradual
drop in volume.
This linear periodization model can be characterized as a system
that starts with a high volume of training and progressively decreases this
volume, while at the same time intensity of the workouts starts low and is
progressively increased. In this case, volume and intensity are inversely
related. Looking at the hard workouts themselves, it can be seen that the
pace of these is generally increased from the start of the training until the
end. Training might start with the harder workouts being done at LT or
similar tempo intensities, progress to 10k-5k speeds, then to vVO2 speeds,
and finally speeds that are at mile pace or faster.
--- PAGE 249 ---
Funnel/Mixed Periodization
The funnel model of periodization is a newer training theory that is
taking hold in distance running. Its modern origins appear to be from the
Italian system of training and have been popularized by coaches Renato
Canova and Luciano Giggliotti. This program focuses on the specificity of
the harder workouts. In Canova’s terms the harder workouts progress from
General to Special to Specific (Canova, 1999; Hudson, 2008). Specific is
defined as the goal pace for the peak race the athlete is training for. The
further away from this pace, in both faster and slower directions, the more
general the workout becomes. The workouts come from two different
extremes and funnel towards specificity. On one extreme, workouts start
out with highly aerobic work such as longer steady runs and then
progresses towards the specific race pace with workouts getting
progressively faster and shorter. On the other extreme, workouts would
start very short and very fast, such as 60m sprints, and then progress
upwards to longer and slower workouts toward the specific workouts.
For example, if an athlete were training for a 5k race, his goal 5k
time would be the specific pace. From the aerobic side, the workouts
might progress from steady runs at marathon pace to LT runs to 10k paced
intervals and finally to a 5k paced interval workout. On the other extreme,
workouts might progress from 60m sprints, to 200m at 800m pace, to
400’s at 1500m pace, to 800s at 3,000m pace, and finally to specific work
at 5k pace. Essentially, the workouts start at the extremes and work
towards each other, like a funnel. Volume is manipulated in a different
way than the classic linear model too. Overall volume of training is
--- PAGE 250 ---
progressively increased during the first period of training, and then peaks
and stays relatively constant until the peaking phase where there is a drop
but only a slight one (Hudson, 2008).
--- PAGE 251 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 253 ---
13

--- PAGE 254 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 255 ---
Where Do We Go From Here?
Differences between Scientists and
Coaches
“The human body is centuries ahead of the physiologists.” Roger
Bannister
 
Before moving on to the training section, I’d like to briefly outline
some of the unanswered issues we have in the field with regards to
running and why coaches and scientists seem to be at opposite ends of the
spectrum with their beliefs.
 
Unanswered Questions
There are many unanswered questions in our knowledge of the
limits and training of distance runners. Considerable debate exists on the
exact mechanisms which limit or cause fatigue during running. From a
scientific standpoint, it is hard to see how we can recommend ways to
delay fatigue if the exact mechanisms that cause fatigue are still debated.
Research such as the work done on Noakes’ Central Governor Model and
Samuel Marcora’s model based on motivation are steps in the right
direction in working towards this goal. Similarly in their study Vollaard
came to the conclusion that “Moreover, we demonstrate that VO2max and
aerobic performance associate with distinct and separate physiological and
biochemical endpoints, suggesting that proposed models for the
determinants of endurance performance may need to be revisited (2009,
pg. 1483)”. Perhaps this shift in thinking will get us away from the
propensity for relying almost solely on VO2max as a measure of
endurance when it is only one factor,  has exploded due to its ease of
measurement, and does not even change in elite runners. Which raises the
question why is so much training focused literature done on trying to
impact a parameter that does not change much, if at all, in well-trained
runners? In addition, the validity of giving training recommendations
based solely on improving parameters such as VO2max, LT, and RE,
should be called into question when changing those parameters does not
--- PAGE 256 ---
result in changes in performance (Vollaard et al., 2009; Daniels, 2005). On
the same subject of VO2, using percentages of VO2max as a way to
quantify training should be called into question given the wide range of
stimulus it may provide. It is tough to give advice on training to improve
performance when the exact mechanisms that limit performance are not
known. Given this, for research that is geared towards being able to give
practical guidelines to coaches on how to train runners, the focus should
be on changes in performance and not some parameter.
Furthermore, for runners, I’d argue that researchers should shift
away from trying to find the magic workout that improves performance
and instead try to explain why workouts that successful coaches use work.
When looking at the innovations in track and field training or in
techniques, almost all of them come from the athletes or coaches first and
then the science comes in and explains why it works. One prominent
example is in the High Jump technique the Fosbury Flop. There is a large
gap between the research studies’ ideas about training and the real world
coach’s approach to training. For instance, many researchers and studies
point to a lower volume, higher intensity approach, yet practically none of
the best distance runners follow this approach. It is easy as a researcher to
say that maybe the athletes would be better if they followed the opposite
approach, yet as pointed out by Seiler and Tønnessen, it is more likely that
elite athletes have developed more efficient training means than those
developed in the lab (2009). There are several reasons for this difference,
such as the length of training intervention studies. These limitations of
studies are not easily overcome, so rethinking the approach or even
purpose of training studies needs to be done.
This disconnect also happens in regards to the impact of training
intensities. Most research studies classify training based on physiological
variables such as LT and VO2max. Yet, most coaches classify training
based on different race paces or percentages of race paces. This means that
coaches seem to be more specific during workouts with their training
paces than training studies. A coach sees differences between running
800m intervals at 2:15 as compared to 2:12, yet in most training studies
for someone running around 8:50 for 2miles, these paces would all be
considered VO2max training intensities. The classification of training in
certain zones does not take into account the differences between various
--- PAGE 257 ---
paces. Similarly, the classification of training based on %VO2max should
be called into question based on recent studies. This could potentially
explain the wide range in results of training intervention studies and is
another factor that needs to be taken into consideration.
This leads to the logical conclusion that research should shift in
design to actually mimic what is done in the real world. It is very seldom
seen that an athlete does the same exact interval session 2-3 times a week
for 6 weeks, yet that is what is done in training studies to discern the
effects of a particular workout. Perhaps the effects of that workout would
be different when surrounded by a variety of other stimuli, which is what
is found in the real world.
Getting away from training studies for a minute, there is little to no
research in regards to the planning and periodizing of training on the
microcycle, mesocycle, and macrocycle level. Although it is a common
practice, there are no research studies that show that alternating hard and
easy running days is more beneficial than some other manipulation. In
addition, there are no studies on the different periodization models used in
training. In fact, there are few running studies showing that periodization
is better than doing the same thing every day. Several studies have pointed
towards the need for periodization, but none have evaluated its
effectiveness. For instance, in Laursen’s review, he points out endurance
adaptations can occur via two different pathways that require two
completely different stimuli (2004). This finding may help clear up the
debate on volume versus intensity and show that it is not whether one is
better than the other but when each is used during training that is
important. In other words, the periodization of the training is the key.
Lastly, given studies showing the individual response to training and
the contrasting views on volume and intensity seen in both research and in
popular training literature, one has to wonder whether not enough
attention is given to the individual differences in people. As researchers
we tend to look at things as averages of a group and ignore the
individuals. The wide variety of training programs that are successful in
increasing performance is perplexing. One possible answer is that
adaptation to a training stress is highly individual. Attributes such as fiber
type distribution may play a role in determining whether a person
responds best to a high intensity or high volume type of training. This
--- PAGE 258 ---
possibility needs to be investigated and more attention to the individual
response to training needs to be given.
Despite the large volume of research that has been done on
endurance training, the fact remains that training runners based on
research only is not a successful way to train. Breaking away from
laboratory type studies and looking at some of the training methods used
by coaches of runners in the real world would be a step in bridging the gap
between research and practical application. As of now, little credence is
given to research studies by coaches or athletes, most likely because two
factors. First, the studies on training seldom are applicable to real world
training. Second, on many issues, such as volume of training, due to the
measurements used and the length of studies, the research does not match
up with real world experiences by world-class athletes. This creates a
situation where even those coaches who have a scientific background rely
on theory rather than actual research. Perhaps by mimicking what is done
by coaches, such as the periodization schemes used, research could gain
credibility in terms of practical application by coaches and athletes.
 
The Problem with Applying Research to the
Real World
When a scientist looks at distance training they break it down and try
to isolate a variable. The goal is to find out how a single workout affects a
variable. It is what I call the isolation approach. This is how we get the
information on what kind of training seems to increase the lactate threshold
or improve buffering capacity for example. Let’s look at a quick
hypothetical situation of what typically occurs when athletes or coaches
read such studies.
The next step in the process once a coach or runner hears of the
research is that they look at the data and come to the seemingly logical
conclusion that if X training improves buffering capacity, for example, then
runners should do X training or workout to get an improvement in buffering
capacity, and because buffering capacity is a limiter to certain races, that
race time will improve. So the coach who does this goes out and
implements this training with his runners and smugly throws around
scientific explanations for why his athletes are performing the intervals they
--- PAGE 259 ---
are to anybody who will listen, but something goes wrong, and his runners
do not improve their race times. The coach then becomes perplexed and
either reasons that the science was wrong and becomes an anti-physiology
coach or  that the training did not succeed because the athlete did not work
hard enough. If the coach took his athletes to a lab, he most likely would
see an increase in buffering capacity. Then he may become further
perplexed and think that the athletes are “weak” runners and not tough
enough because the workout obviously accomplished what it was meant to.
The real reason for failure, however, is in the logic, not in the athletes
or the coach or the science. Buffering Capacity did increase as the science
said it would, but you have to look at the global effects of a workout, not
just a singular effect. The singular effect was an increase in buffering
capacity, but there are many other singular effects that the science did not
look into or explain and all of these singular effects make up the global
effect. It is this global effect that is most important. In our example, the
intervals had one singular effect of increasing buffering capacity. If you did
research, another effect would probably be a decrease in aerobic capabilities
due to the heavy acidosis that the athlete endured to increase buffering
capacity. Thus these two effects combined (and any others for the workout)
would make the global effect an increase in buffering capacity with a
decrease in aerobic capabilities.
This example illustrates the differences in approach between
scientists and a coach. Scientists must think in isolation as they are trying to
discern the exact effects of one variable. Good coaches on the other hand
are concerned with the end result or, in other terms, the global effects of a
workout. We have to stop thinking of the singular effects a workout might
have and start thinking about the global effects it will have on the athlete.
Not only do the global effects of one particular workout need to be
considered, but also how the workout interacts within a training program
needs to be considered. One example that has already been researched is the
interference effect with concurrent strength and endurance training.
The takeaway message is that to be useful in the real world of training
athletes, the isolation method cannot be used. Training does not occur in
isolation. Instead, a global and integrated approach to training should be
taken. It’s my belief that this difference in perspective or approach between
the researchers and the successful coaches is why for the most part the
--- PAGE 260 ---
training of the best runners reflects practices established in the real world
and not the laboratory. This leads to the next section of the book, which is a
look at how to train to maximize performance.
 
 
--- PAGE 261 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 263 ---
Section 2
--- PAGE 264 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 265 ---
 How to Train
 
“We don’t have the time or the mental bandwidth to observe and
consider each detail of every item in our environment. Instead we employ a
few salient traits that we do observe to assign the object to a category, and
then we base our assessment of the object on the category rather than the
object itself.” Leonard Mlodinow
It is time to step away from the science and instead focus on what
most people care about, the actual training. This portion of the book is
designed to teach you how to train at a high level to maximize
performance. I’ll go through every step in designing a training program,
with particular emphasis on how to individualize training for every runner.
The purpose is not to have you blindly follow a training program but rather
to teach you how to train. Unlike most training books, I have not held back
or dumbed down the training in any way. It is written for serious runners
trying to reach their limits of performance.
If you have skipped the science section, I suggest going back and
reading the chapters on fatigue and on The Genetics of Training and
Adaptation as it provides a foundation for the processes that one goes
through from training to adaptation. I hope that the following information
helps you maximize performance or become a better coach. Lastly, I’d
like to recognize some of the numerous coaching influences who provided
the foundation for the training section:
 
Coaching Influences:
Gerald Stewart          Tom Tellez                 Renato Canova
Arthur Lydiard          Scott Raczko              Jan Olbrecht
Harry Wilson                        Ernie Maglischo         Antonio Cabral
Peter Coe                  Marius Bakken            Theresa Fuqua
Joe Vigil                    Geoffrey Dyson         Fred Wilt
Percy Cerutty                       Joe Douglas                Mihaly Igloi
Jay Johnson               Brad Hudson               Vern Gambetta
Charlie Casserly       Jason Winchester        Bob Duckworth
--- PAGE 266 ---
Mike Del Donno
--- PAGE 267 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 269 ---
14

--- PAGE 270 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 271 ---
The Philosophy of Training
 
“It is much easier, as well as far more enjoyable, to identify and label
the mistakes of others than to recognize our own. Questioning what we
believe and want is difficult at the best of times, and especially difficult
when we most need to.” Daniel Kahneman
 
While the first half of this book focused on science, I’d like to take a
philosophical approach to training in the second. All of the information in
the first half of this book is needed, but we have to be able to translate that
knowledge into something that is usable; something that we can quickly
conceptualize. As we did in the previous chapter, we can use models to
simplify the complexity and in turn make concepts easy to use. Dan Dennett
in his book Intuition Pumps describes the process as oversimplification:
 
“Oversimplifications can be in science; they can cut
through the hideous complexity with a             working model
that is almost right, postponing the messy details until later.”
 
The central tenet is to break down all the complexity displayed in the
first half into something that is pretty close to right, but taking out all of the
needless details that don’t have a large impact on the practical result. It’s
not that the details aren’t important; they certainly are. It’s that trying to
account for every minute factor leaves us with an unwieldy model, which
then leaves us unable to distinguish the forest from the trees. Using this
idea, let’s look at training, attempting to break it down as simply as
possible. If you remember back to the genetics of training, we had a flow
chart that took us from training stimulus to messengers formed and
eventually to functional adaptation.
 
If we eliminate the details what we are left with is the simple path of:
 
Training Stimulus      Adaptation  GIVEN
adequate recovery and nutrition
--- PAGE 272 ---
 
It seems simplistic but the adaptation that we get from any training
method is a result of whatever stimulus was applied. In other words, our
body adapts to the stimulus it is given and in the direction that the stimulus
is applied. By eliminating the “mess” in the middle, we are making some
assumptions. The biggest of which is that the process goes according to
plan, and in most cases that means that we have proper recovery going into
and coming out of the training stimulus that allows our body to adapt. What
we are left with then is two assumptions.
Assumptions Made
1.    We assume that the person follows a normal route of
adaptation.
2.    We assume that the recovery is correct and long term
adaptation takes place.
 
Given this information, we can now use it as a road map in figuring
out what the key factors are that a coach needs to decipher. At this point,
let’s ignore our assumptions and focus on the stimulus to adaptation part of
the equation. Given that focus, we are left with three important factors that
a coach needs to know to solve this part of the problem:
 
1.    The training adaptation we are looking for.
2.    What stimulus leads to that adaptation?
3.    How much is enough?
 
What we’ve just done is try to make our way through a logic problem.
If stimulus leads to adaptation given enough rest, then what matters is
applying the correct stimulus to get the adaptation the athlete needs and
then knowing how long it takes before a similar stimulus can be applied.
The first step is knowing what adaptation we are in search of, then deciding
what the stimulus is that leads to that adaptation, and finally figuring out
how much of that stimulus we need to get the necessary adaptation.
It may seem like an exercise in futility to go through this logic
problem, but what it does is alter the coaching process to a degree. It
--- PAGE 273 ---
defines what the coach needs to know. And if we know the questions that
we need to be asking, then we can actually answer them. Too often, we skip
the idea of asking the questions and go straight to trying to find the answers.
To figure out the answers to the above questions, the coach needs to figure
out several things about their athlete. What we are left with then is what I
define as the absolute things a coach needs to know, and then the concepts
that he probably should know but aren’t a requirement for some success.
When we bring back in the assumptions of recovery and nutrition, then we
are left with the following variables that a coach needs to consider in
designing the workouts and training plans.
 
What a Coach Needs to Know
1.     What adaptations are needed for your individual athlete training for
an event.
2.     Timing—At what period and how often should the athlete be
working on these adaptations.
3.     How much stimulus (volume, intensity, density, etc.) needs to be
applied for your individual athlete.
4.     How much recovery and what type of training can be done while the
athlete adapts.
Advanced Understandings
5.     What external factors can influence adaption (nutrition, recovery,
physio, timing, etc.)
6.     Interactions between confounding adaptations.
7.     Amplifiers and Dampeners of adaptation process.
Knowing the Adaptation
The first, and probably most obvious step is to figure out what
adaptations are needed for your event and athlete. There are three steps to
answering this question. First, the event itself provides a physiological
blueprint. Obviously each event requires different demands, whether it is in
--- PAGE 274 ---
terms of aerobic versus anaerobic contribution, tactics, psychology, or
mechanical demands. Using knowledge of physiology presented in the first
section and the models of fatigue in the last chapter, we can come up with a
generalized picture of each event.
The next step is to look at how the individual affects this generalized
model. Each individual will bring a slightly different biomechanical and
physiological profile to his or her race distance. Whether it is a varied
muscle fiber type, reliance on elastic energy return, or mentality, their
individual physiology affects how we approach training for each event.
Individuals’ physiological make up causes shifts because it changes the
event demands and what stimuli might lead to an adaptation. Therefore we
need to take the event demands plus the individual characteristics and use
that to design our training model.
This is quite different from a traditional model of coaching. While it
may seem subtle, it is important. Traditionally, the idea is that we come up
with a grand overarching training philosophy, and then somehow force each
athlete into that model. What I am suggesting as a theme throughout this
book is to turn that idea on its head. Know the event demands and how the
individual affects those demands and then build your training model around
that. This can be depicted in the illustration below.
Traditional Model
 
Athlete Centered Model
 
--- PAGE 275 ---
Throughout the rest of the training section of this book, we delve into
the details that surround the principles of adaptation discussed above. The
individualization chapter will cover in detail how the makeup of each
runner affects the event model, while the chapter on workout design will
cover how to manipulate workouts to create a stimulus for a specific
adaptation. For now, it’s enough to understand the influence that they have.
 
Timing it Out
Once we know what adaptations we are trying to develop, the next
step is determining the timing of developing each. Not to sound like a
broken record, but again this depends on both the event and the individual
makeup of the runner. These are the key determinants in deciding how
much, when, and how quickly we develop a particular adaptation. That
being said there are some general principles that should be adhered to.
While we will cover the details on this process in detail during the
periodization chapter, let’s focus on the process of deciding the timing of
various adaptations.
The first step is to look at how long it will take to develop a particular
adaptation for that athlete. This of course depends on how much we are
trying to progress an adaptation. If we are looking at making huge gains in
general aerobic endurance, then we might need to devote more time than if
we were looking for moderate gains. There are adaptations that occur very
quickly, such as neural adaptations to a balance program, and there are
adaptations that take very long to develop, such as general endurance.
Remember that we are not talking about how long it takes to maximally
develop an adaptation, as that may take years of work, but instead, in this
context we are talking about how long it will take within this periodization
time frame to reach a level necessary to hit this season’s goals.
Additionally, we have to know the individual timing of development
and how that might change over a career. For instance, the amount of
anaerobic development for distance runners is highly variable. Some
athletes need a long and gradual buildup of anaerobic work, while others
need only 4-6 weeks of simple sharpening to increase their anaerobic
capacity to an acceptable level at that time period. And this might change as
the athlete ages and develops a better aerobic system. The same can be said
--- PAGE 276 ---
with specific endurance, strength, speed, or any other adaptation. There will
be individual variability within the general time frame that it takes to
develop those adaptations. Figuring out what kind of runner you are, which
will be covered in the individualization chapter, helps take some of the
guesswork out of this decision. We can broadly classify runners based on
their physiology and make educated guesses on how they respond to certain
training stimuli and how quickly they adapt. Then we can use feedback
from the athlete and experience of coaching them to make further
adjustments or to make sure they are adapting in the same manor and
fashion in which we “guessed”.
 
Stress and Recover
The final two factors that a coach needs to know are how much
stimuli to apply and how much recovery is needed to come out of that
stimulus. In the subsequent chapter, workout design will be covered in
which details of how to increase the stimulus will be covered, so again, I
will leave that to be covered shortly. But in terms of recovery, the main
factors to look at are how strong or weak an athlete is at that particular
stimuli and then how much larger of a stress is that workout than the last
workout targeted at that adaptation.
It should be obvious that the amount of stress that a workout causes
should be in proportion to how much recovery is needed following that
workout. It only makes sense that if we do a large session that completely
drains the athlete, then more recovery should be used than if we did a
standard moderate workout. The question is how much is enough when it
comes to recovery.
The first question that needs to be answered is what is the
recoverability of the athlete. We can generally classify athletes from strong
to weak in terms of their ability to recover. Their ability to bounce back
may differ based on workout type. When we are assessing recovery, we
need to ask the question of what is it that causes an athlete not to be able to
bounce back. If we look at what running workouts do, then the limiting
factors become apparent.
The first major contributor is mechanical damage to the muscles
themselves. If muscular damage occurs, the muscle cannot function as
--- PAGE 277 ---
efficiently and the sensation of soreness will decrease our body’s ability to
recruit as many muscle fibers, as well as influence our “central governor.”
When assessing recoverability, we should look at how much damage occurs
for each type of workout or race. In general, muscle damage is highest
during high eccentric loads, new exercises or activities, and activities that
are above and beyond what an athlete has done before.
Another contributor is depletion of fuel sources. An athlete may not
be recovering because the workout depleted various fuel sources. So if we
go on a 24 mile run, we expect to be heavily glycogen depleted, but the
degree of depletion depends on how efficient that athlete is in fuel use, his
total glycogen capacity, his fueling strategies, and a host of other factors.
Lastly, we can look at how psychologically strenuous a workout is. If
an athlete has to delve deep and really gut out a workout, they will deplete
their psychological drive or will power to a high degree. Recent research
has shown that our will power decreases over the course of a day and we
are less likely to do things like exercise later in the day due to our depleted
will power. The case is similar with running and working out. If we do a
highly depleting workout, it takes a while before we can emotionally and
psychologically delve back into the same depths. It’s almost as if our brain
is regulating how many times we can go to the well and come out of it.
This phenomenon is not simply psychological though, as it should
make sense that if one invests a lot emotionally and psychologically there
are physical consequences. For instance, if we are anxious about a workout,
we may activate our stress response to a slightly higher degree, which
means we start flooding our body with stress hormones like cortisol. Then
we need a subsequent recovery period where we switch out of that
sympathetic nervous system dominated state and return to homeostasis. The
stress response is not simply a reaction to physical stress but instead to
stress in general. In running we are keenly aware of the physical stress, but
we need to realize that psychological or emotional stress also contributes to
the total stress load.
Therefore we have to look at both the physical and psychological to
assess how well they recover from each workout. After all, a workout can
be relatively moderate physically but have a huge psychological demand if
a runner fears a particular type of workout. Therefore, it’s important to look
at all aspects of stress load and how a runner recovers from them. The best
--- PAGE 278 ---
way to monitor recovery is not by some top-secret scientific gadget, but
instead by simply listening to your body. It is a skill to understand the
feedback that your body is providing.
That being said, there are certain tests that can be used to assess
damage, stress, and recoverability. These are listed in the chart below and
are categorized into four sections. Emotional and mental readiness can be
assessed via various psychological questionnaires or simply by asking the
athletes about their mood. Additionally, mental reactions tests traditionally
used in psychology or neuroscience hold some promise in assessing
readiness. In looking at the generalized stress response we can look at
cortisol, heart rate variability, or a T to C ratio which all give us an
imprecise but general view of where the overall body is at. In terms of
physical damage, the most reliable marker is simply soreness, but we can
also look at markers for inflammation and damage. Lastly, when assessing
neural fatigue, we can look at ground contact times or counter movement
jump performance as a surrogate measure. Or we can once again look
towards psychology research and look at simple reaction tests such as a
repeated finger tap to give a rough assessment of neural fatigue.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment Tools for Recoverability:
--- PAGE 279 ---
Once we have assessed the recoverability of the individual athlete,
then we combine it with our knowledge of how stressful the workout is to
determine how much recovery is needed after a workout to ensure
adaptation. As was mentioned previously, each type of workout takes a
varying amount of time to recover from. For instance, we don’t need as
long to recover from a 9 mile easy run as we do from doing a 4 mile tempo
run. That should be obvious, but within workout types there is variation too.
Jan Olbrecht, in his book The Science of Winning presents data that give a
rough estimate of how much recovery is needed for each workout type.
While these are rough estimates, it’s a good starting point for deciding how
many easy days are needed after a hard workout. The end result though is
that the degree of stress is the deciding factor for recovery. Regardless of
workout “type”, the stress level that takes into account the volume and
intensity as well as external factors decides how much recovery is needed to
adapt.
 
External Factors Affecting Adaptation
The contents of the workout itself are not the only thing that matters.
Up until this point we have worked under the assumption that we proceed
normally from stimulus to adaptation without any external force acting
upon that process. We have also assumed that nutrition and recovery were
adequate to allow for making this journey towards functional adaptation.
--- PAGE 280 ---
Now we need to shift focus and look at the details that may either amplify
or dampen the training effect of a certain workout.
 
Amplifiers of Adaptation
Amplifiers of adaptation are anything that may boost our subsequent
adaptation either by acting early and increasing the stimulus or by
increasing the conversion of that stimulus to an adaptation by bolstering
recovery from the workout. When we think of boosting the stimulus of the
workout, it’s not just about making that workout harder so that our bodies
are forced to adapt to a higher stress load. Instead it’s about forcing a higher
stress in a particular direction that we know we can handle.
There are a few main ways to accomplish this. The first way is to
perform workouts in a pre-fatigued state. Instead of being completely fresh
for all hard workouts if we start them in a slightly depleted state, we can
now delve deeper into the depths of glycogen depletion and access muscle
fibers we seldom recruit. So, we get a slightly different training effect
thanks to the pre-fatigue. To accomplish this we can manipulate the training
cycle so that athletes aren’t fully recovered going into a workout or insert
workout days where they perform two separate intense workouts on the
same day. The possibilities are endless, but remember that we are trying to
increase the stress of the training slightly, and it’s important to make sure
that we don’t push that stress over the edge and fail to recover.
The last amplifier that influences the training stress part of the
equation is manipulating fuel to shift adaptations. If we are looking to
improve our ability to run with reduced glycogen or shift to being more
efficient using fuel, then we can manipulate our fuel stores via nutrition to
amplify this shift. The best way to do this is either via fasted runs or longer
runs with no supplemental fuel. When we do runs when running lower on
fuel, our body realizes that it needs to become more efficient so that it
doesn’t reach the depths of fuel deprivation again.
Traditionally, we’ve relied on long runs for this effect. But we can
further aid this process by doing runs in a fasted state because we have
essentially pre-fatigued ourselves fuel wise. So our bodies are forced to find
a way to deal with and adapt to this. Similarly, instead of taking your
carbohydrate drink or gels during every long run, consider running some
--- PAGE 281 ---
with only water. The goal here is to similarly allow for glycogen depletion
to get pretty low on the long run so that the body is forced to adapt.
The other amplifiers all refer to improving the recovery side of the
coin. If we can supply the right nutrients and help the body’s natural
recovery process we can positively influence adaptation. The obvious one is
recovery nutrition. We all have been inundated with information about
taking our carbohydrates or protein after a workout, so I won’t cover that in
detail, except to say that it works and that protein is showing to be more
important not only for muscle repair but also for tendon growth. It starts the
process and helps shift the balance towards an anabolic state of buildup and
repair.
A further way to take advantage of the effects of protein is to take
“hits” of protein throughout the day. Taking five hits of ~20g of protein
throughout the day will keep protein synthesis elevated throughout the day.
Additionally, taking a large dose of protein before bed will keep protein
synthesis elevated during sleep, which is when a large portion of recovery
and repair takes place. This hit of protein before bed has been shown to
significantly aid recovery. So it’s a good strategy to use when trying to
recover from a particularly hard bout of training.
While on the topic of sleep, it too can potentially amplify the recovery
process. The recovery process largely takes place during sleep, and it is
during the sleep cycles where a unique combination of repair, processing,
and learning occurs. As mentioned previously, we can manipulate protein
synthesis during sleep via nutrition supplementation, but sleep also plays a
role in hormone secretion. Research has shown that testosterone levels rise
during the first REM cycle, while Human Growth Hormone (HGH) goes
through a cycle of peaks and valleys corresponding to the sleep cycles. The
point is not to obsess over when HGH or testosterone is produced but
instead to know that delays in falling asleep or interference in the sleep
cycle can severely affect the production of both of these hormones, which
in turn can influence recovery and repair. Additionally, sleep is often the
time when neural programming seems to be ingrained and learning
processes that occurred during the day are cemented. It is for these reasons
that sleep can be an amplifier in terms of recovery and adaptation.
Finally, before moving on to dampeners of adaptation, the last
amplifier is massage. While massage has been used throughout history as a
--- PAGE 282 ---
recovery device, it’s never fully been scientifically backed because the
mechanisms touted such as increased blood flow never really materialized.
We know that massage can manipulate the muscle in the short term by
adjusting muscle tension, but what about long term adaptations? Recent
work by Mark Tarnopolsky out of McMaster University in Canada found
that massage actually increases the activity of PGC-1a while dampening
NF-kB. NF-kB is a protein involved in inflammation in the muscle, while
PGC-1a was heavily mentioned in the first half of this book. Its role is a
precursor along the way to creating more mitochondria. While this work is
preliminary, it shows that massage might have a potential role as an
enhancer (and possibly dampener) of adaptation.
 
Dampeners of Adaptation
The other side of the coin is that there are certain things that can
negatively influence the adaptation process. These processes can act in two
different ways; either dampening down the stimulus or by affecting the
recovery in a negative way. We have already mentioned the balance of
making training easier or more difficult based on taking nutrition or even
performing a workout on pre-fatigued legs, so instead we will focus on
external items which might affect the stimulus and recovery. Ironically, this
dampening effect often comes as a result of someone trying to improve
recovery.
Damage is generally thought of as a bad thing, but the reality is that it
acts as a signaler for adaptation. If we did not create any damage or
overwhelm  homeostasis, then our body has nothing to adapt and respond
to. The class of adaptation dampeners largely consists of items that affect
the damage created. We can start with the inflammatory response. When we
create micro tears in a muscle, the body responds by going through an
inflammatory cycle to initiate repair and strengthening. This is all natural
and good, but oftentimes we try to speed up the process artificially by
taking anti-inflammatories or plunging into the dreaded ice bath.
What happens here is that the anti-inflammatory drugs or substance
clears out some of the inflammatory biomarkers which act as signaling
pathway triggers. When we clear these markers out and thus dampen the
pathway activation, what we are left with is less translation to a functional
--- PAGE 283 ---
adaptation. In simpler terms, if our body senses a lot of inflammation, it
brings in the heavy-duty repair equipment to shore up the defenses and
build it stronger. If all of the sudden, we have a 3rd party that takes care of
some of the damage, then the body simply says, “oh the problem wasn’t as
bad as we thought, so we don’t have to do as big of a fortification job as we
anticipated.”
In addition to anti-inflammatories, antioxidants work in much the
same way. Oxidation occurs during running and acts as one of the major
triggers for increasing mitochondria to deal with all of these pro-oxidants. If
all of a sudden we take in an artificial anti-oxidant, then we again have a 3rd
party that acts as a cleaning crew and shuts down the signal that the body
needs to majorly adapt. What is interesting is that, according to research,
only artificial antioxidants vitamins seem to have this strong effect. Natural
antioxidants coming from fruits do not cause this effect.
Using anti-inflammatories, antioxidants, or even too much of other
recovery modalities, is all part of a phenomenon I call over-recovery. It’s an
epidemic that has occurred largely due to our want to just do something.
You see this in the training room of any university, where modalities that
have no proof are used on injuries, just to do something for it. We’ve
essentially taken recovery and made it too much of a good thing. Instead of
always dampening the training stimulus, and therefore possibly limiting
adaptation, a coach should periodize the recovery. A coach should decide
when it makes sense that the adaptation is king and when it makes sense to
not care about eking out an extra percentage point of adaptation and instead
focus on recovery. These aren’t the only dampeners of adaptation, but
instead provide a snapshot and a guide to realizing that there are other
similar recovery modalities out there that probably act in the same way.
 
Mixed Modifiers
This last set of modifiers can be either amplifiers or dampeners of
adaptation depending on how and when they are used. This is slightly true
for all modifiers, even those discussed previously, but for the select ones
below, there can be a large difference in how they act on an adaptation
depending on the circumstances.
--- PAGE 284 ---
Caffeine is a central nervous system stimulant that improves
performance. It therefore can increase race performance, as well as
performance in a training session. Thus it can amplify the adaptation by
artificially letting you run faster splits or pushing further in a workout. The
problem is that it comes at a cost. We highly adapt to caffeine as it can
change adenosine receptors in the brain if chronically consumed. We adapt
so much to it that for habitual coffee drinkers the energy buzz they get from
drinking their morning coffee is simply a return to baseline from the
withdrawal effects of caffeine. The facts that we can get adapted to it and
that if we use it every workout we artificially stress the CNS beyond its
normal control means that we can somewhat “fry” the nervous system by
constant chronic caffeine intake. Additionally, we lose its effectiveness to a
degree. That’s why caffeine can acutely improve performance and
adaptation but can chronically impair adaptation if we do not keep it in
balance.
Similar to caffeine, we can manipulate the stress of a workout via
psychological stressors. According to Hans Selye’s General Adaptation
Syndrome, we respond to a stressor in a generalized similar way regardless
of whether it is a physical, emotional, or even perceived stress. So when we
add psychological stress on top of the physical stress of running, we can
either enhance adaptation or suppress it. The next trend in training will be
related to cognitive training where we stress the cognitive limits of our
brain both in terms of concentration and fatigue resistance. Referring back
to the chapter on fatigue, you can see why. The physical manifestation of
fatigue is largely related to mental fatigue. So we can probably use
psychological or mental stressors to challenge adaptation. An example
might be doing simple arithmetic during long runs, or using a computer
game to do mind numbing mental tasks before going out and doing a hard
workout. Performance of that workout will be impaired, but psychological
adaptation will be challenged.
On the other hand, psychological stress could impair training
adaptation via either pre-fatiguing so much that an athlete over-trains and
cannot adapt to the workload or by leading to negative psychological
adaptations to fatigue such as a mental phobia to certain workouts or races.
It is important then to understand when to push the boundaries of
psychological or cognitive stress and when to ensure a well-rested mentally
--- PAGE 285 ---
clear performance. We can see the drastic effects by the fact that placebos
and nocebos can greatly influence perception of pain and fatigue. Simply
believing that something will increase or decrease pain can alter training
and adaptation.
Carbohydrate intake can also amplify or dampen adaptation based on
the timing of it. I have previously discussed the concept of train low,
compete high in regards to carbohydrate intake. There is a growing body of
evidence that shows training in a low glycogen state activates signaling
pathways that influence both aerobic gains and fuel efficiency. It makes
sense that pressing lower into the depths of glycogen depletion would cause
the body to find a way to be better at using it efficiently. On the other hand,
constantly training low would limit how fast or long we could go and
therefore dampen adaptation. Similarly, taking carbohydrate during a
workout might dampen fuel efficiency adaptations, but it may help with
adaptations in the gut in allowing the gut to take in, process, and use the
carbohydrate quicker on the run. Once again, this is why timing and
purpose of the run is critical.
Strength training can also help or hinder adaptations. In looking at the
main signaling targets for strength and endurance gains, they essentially act
as antagonists, but mostly in the direction of strength. It’s one of the reasons
why strength gains are limited when combining with heavy endurance
work. Timing is once again critical. For instance, a low amount of strength
training can influence recovery via changes in hormone concentrations
when done after a run. While doing it the other way around, strength first
and then running right after, will increase strength endurance but dampen
down the muscle growth gains from the strength work because endurance
exercise will shut down the mTOR pathway, which could be good or bad
depending on the goal of the training. While it would require an in depth
look to go through all of the outcomes and interactions, the point is where
you schedule strength matters.
Lastly, especially with the invention of artificial altitude, we can
easily use altitude to modify adaptation. We can challenge workouts and
hope for spikes in aerobic adaptations by performing a workout at altitude.
Or, an idea that has not yet been researched, we can manipulate the
recovery and presumably the adaptations by making the post workout
--- PAGE 286 ---
recovery take place in altitude. These could be positive or negative
influencers on adaptation.
Altitude should be thought of as another stressor, just like heat,
humidity, or including a hill in a run. Once it is thought as a stressor and not
as some magic device or formula, it becomes easier to understand why it
might help or hinder an athlete. The use of altitude then depends on the goal
of the training session or training block. It can either help by forcing
adaptation in the aerobic direction, or it could hinder by causing an
overload of stress or by inhibiting recovery.
While this is not an exhaustive list, the goal should be to start
thinking outside of the X’s and O’s of the workout itself and instead
consider the important variables that surround those workouts. The friends
that I have had who have gone to East Africa always remark on the East
African’s stress free approach to training and racing. The workouts are
incredibly tough, but there are no long nights spent awake dreading the next
workout or nervous eyes fearing what is to come. Similarly, there’s no huge
emotional dwelling on a bad race after the fact. I can’t help but think that
this reduction of psychological stress may play a role in their success. So
keep in mind that what surrounds the workouts can indeed effect what you
get out of the workout itself. Now we need to discuss perhaps the most
important part of coaching and training.
 
Balancing Act
Before moving on to the details of how to create and manipulate
workouts, we need to cover one more overarching concept. Training at its
simplest form is a balancing act. As a coach, the goal is to simultaneously
build and develop seemingly opposing forces. In the world of distance
running, we need to balance speed versus endurance, strength versus
efficiency, and flexibility versus stiffness, to name a few.
This conundrum of having to develop systems that are almost playing
a game of tug of war against each creates some unique challenges. Training
isn’t simply the idea of continually building fitness in each separate area. If
it were, life would be easy. We would simply keep increasing the stimulus
for endurance or speed or whatever component individually for as long as
--- PAGE 287 ---
we could until its time to peak. The problem though is that everything
interacts.
This pattern of competing interactions starts at the physiological level
before being translated into a functional difference. For example, we can
see how the mTOR pathway, which plays a role in strength gains, can be
inhibited after being activated simply by doing endurance training. If we
were to go lifts weights for muscle hypertrophy, part of the trigger for that
adaptation is activation of the mTOR pathway. We try to keep the activation
of this pathway high even after we finish the workout so that we can
translate and maximize the strength gains. If we were to do a 30 minute up-
tempo run immediately following the lift, then the mTOR pathway would
be down regulated as the aerobic workout would inhibit this pathway. Thus,
we probably wouldn’t get the full benefits of the lift.
The mTOR pathway example is but one interaction of opposing
forces and as it was explained above relates to the short term programming
of training. While this is important, the long-term balance of opposing
forces is more important and plays a critical role in training periodization.
While there are many major components that interact, the major key
concepts to keep in mind when considering balance are speed, endurance,
strength, and power. If you recall from the chapter on Lactate, we can
clearly see this opposing tug of war happening in a lactate curve using the
ideas of Jan Olbrecht.
Using the lactate curve, we can see that if we do a lot of endurance
and threshold work, we will generally see less lactate produced at each
intensity, and we assume that we improved our endurance. This might be
true, but what other event could cause us to see less lactate produced at
every intensity? A decrease in our anaerobic capacity, or how much lactate
we can produce in full. If we did so much endurance work that now we
produce 15mmol instead of 20mmol, then we’ll see lower lactate levels
throughout, even if we didn’t improve our aerobic abilities at all. We simply
got way worse in our anaerobic abilities. This is a classic case of doing too
much endurance work, not enough speed or anaerobic work, and killing
speed. This might be fine, IF that is the desired balance, which might be the
case for a marathon or longer event.
In the following graph, we show a scenario of balancing the stimulus,
or stress load, and the recovery throughout the year. The units are arbitrary,
--- PAGE 288 ---
but we can use them to represent the concept. In the base phase, we have a
relatively high stimulus perhaps mainly due to the volume of work, but our
recovery is deemphasized. As we progress, you see that the stimulus
reaches the highest point during the pre-competitive phase before tailoring
off slightly during competition, while the recovery becomes increasingly
emphasized. This is just a snapshot of what we expect the overall program
to look like, and we can break down the balance for each individual
component, such as speed and endurance, in the same way across the
season.
 
Stimulus vs. Recovery Balancing Act
 
So obviously we have several components that interact. And we all
intuitively know that speed and endurance, as well as many other systems,
play opposing roles. We also know that different components need to be
built at different rates and time of the year. There’s a reason why the base
phase, which traditionally includes a lot of general endurance training, is
done early in the season. And regardless of your beliefs, we generally
follow a base phase with something more intensive or more speed
orientated. As coaches, we all know that we should periodize in roughly the
same way, but why does that timing and periodization work? If we look
closely, what we are really trying to accomplish makes sense in terms of the
balancing act needed.
What we are intuitively trying to accomplish is to get the balance
right for a particular event and runner at the right time. That is all
--- PAGE 289 ---
periodization is. During the base phase we may increase general endurance
a ton, and sacrifice speed a little, but the hope is that during the speed
phase, we regain that speed and have built our endurance up so much that it
doesn’t suffer much at all. The key though is asking how much do we let
something suffer, such as speed during a base phase, and how much do we
try to maintain a component.
In the older days of Lydiard, the idea was to have extreme swings of
balance. During the base phase athletes would do tons of endurance work,
neglecting speed, and then shift gears completely and do 4-5 days a week of
“speed” training 6-8 weeks before the competition to hopefully build that
speed back up. In modern training, we take the approach of smaller swings
in balance. We try to gradually shift the strengths of components around
without completely neglecting any of them or letting them fall too far
behind.
 
The Goal of Training
The goal of training is therefore simply to know what the correct end
balance for the event and individual is and then modulate training to arrive
at that balance on the correct day. Earlier in this chapter we looked at race
modeling and then correcting that for the individual to come up with the
race demands for each athlete. So if we have the race demands, we know
roughly where that individual’s balance needs to be in terms of speed,
endurance, aerobic/anaerobic, or strength and power. The next step then is
figuring out the logical sequence of improving each component which
includes: knowing what is a prerequisite, at what time of the year a
component needs to be maximized, and at what point might it need to be
sacrificed a little.
A prerequisite is exactly what it sounds like. In order to maximize
some particular component, we may need to develop another component
beforehand. It only makes logical sense that we cannot develop speed
endurance without first developing speed to a degree. We can’t improve a
quality that we have not created or developed. Well, technically we can, but
we are limited in its development. As an example, if we haven’t developed
a large general endurance base, then how do we build on that base with
more high end aerobic or threshold work?
--- PAGE 290 ---
The general rules of thumb for what are typically prerequisites are
listed in the chart below. As mentioned above, the idea behind a pre-req is
that the further we build up the pre-req, then the more we can develop the
subsequent adaptation. In fact, sometimes we cannot progress a particular
adaptation without going back to the pre-requisite adaptation. As a quick
example, if we have an 800m runner who has run 1:47 but can only run a
50.0sec 400m, then no matter how much specific endurance work we do,
his 800m time likely won’t improve. He’s capped out on that development
because he has maxed out that ability because he’s already holding 53.5sec
pace and likely coming through in 52sec. In order to give him some more
room for development, we’d have to work on anaerobic capacity to get that
400m down to 49.0 so that we could then have some room to improve his
specific endurance for the 800m. Given this scenario, a pre-req for his
800m specific endurance development would be work on his anaerobic
capacity to give him a bigger gap between his 400m and what he comes
through in his 800m. This is but one example, and the list below is not
exhaustive, but instead meant to give you an idea on how development
interacts.
Prerequisites
Once we know the prerequisites, we then look at timing out the
balance to reach our optimal race model during our peak racing season. The
event and individual guide this process. We need knowledge of how quickly
a component can be developed, how much someone needs to maintain a
component, and how quickly a component deteriorates when it isn’t being
fully trained. The details on when and how much for each component will
be discussed further in the chapter on periodization, but for now it’s
important to see how this concept works.
Let’s use a simplistic model that looks at our 400m time versus our
threshold times to represent our speed versus endurance development. Let’s
say we have a miler, Brian, and he’s able to run a 49sec 400m, his threshold
--- PAGE 291 ---
work is around 5:10 pace, and he is a 4:08 miler. We’re trying to improve
his mile time and decide he is weak aerobically, so that’s what we
emphasize. Let’s look at three different scenarios that in the tradition of
goldilocks have one that is too much shifted towards the endurance side,
one too much towards speed, and one that is just right.
In the heavy endurance model, let’s say we overload our athlete on
the endurance side, doing nothing but pure aerobic work during the base
phase. Then progress to a pre-competition phase that is heavy on aerobic
support or threshold-like work, before finally sharpening up in the
competition phase. What happens generally is that our balance gets skewed
heavily towards the endurance side. We improve our general and then high
end aerobic abilities a lot, but we neglect the speed side of the equation
during the large majority of the training cycle. It isn’t until the last 5-6
weeks that we do a heavy load of sharpening work and try to hurriedly get
our speed back. What happens in this example is that we let our speed slip
way too much, and we can’t get it back. So our end balance results in the
same performance we had before this season, even though we improved our
threshold a lot due to our neglecting of the speed side for so long.
The next example is if we shifted the balance more towards the speed
side. It doesn’t mean we do only fast interval work throughout, but in this
example it might mean that we do a base phase to improve our aerobic
--- PAGE 292 ---
abilities, but it’s heavily inundated with fast and anaerobic work
throughout. So what happens is we improve our aerobic abilities a bit
during the base, but then they steadily deteriorate as we increase the speed
component. What we are left with is that we got a lot faster on the speed
side, but our aerobic abilities deteriorated, and we run the same or slower.
In the last theoretical example, we get the balance right. We do just
enough work to prevent the deterioration of speed while we improve our
aerobic abilities during the base phase. Then during the pre-competition
phase we shift slightly towards being more speed focused while still
working on our aerobic support, and then during the competition phase, our
speed improves more while our aerobic abilities only fall off slightly thanks
to us maintaining them. In this simple example, we end up with the fastest
mile time of the three scenarios. It is a simplistic look at the process, but the
point is that this athlete reaches a nice balance point and that it isn’t simply
about maximizing each component. Instead it’s about knowing how to
balance the development of speed and endurance and knowing when each
needs to be at their highest during the season.
While this is just an example, the point is that training is essentially
the process of creating the optimal balance of contrasting systems in an
athlete. The event and the individuality of the athlete will shift what balance
is needed and how to achieve the desired balance. It is therefore the coach’s
job to not only figure out what the optimal balance is but to plan and then
adjust as the training proceeds to insure that the proper balance is key.
The purpose of this chapter is to present the philosophical basis for
coaching. It’s to break down the decision making process that goes into
designing the training for your athletes. It might seem tedious, but it’s
important to know what we need to know, what questions we need to ask,
and what we do about it. The rest of the book breaks down how to
accomplish these tasks. We will end with briefly summarizing what the
process entails. I break it into five categories: Identify, Know, Decide,
Design, and Adjust. These represent the steps taken from beginning to the
end.
It starts with identification of the demands and individual adjustments
to create a model. We are creating a model of what the demands are and
how we manipulate the individual’s physiology, biomechanics, and
psychology to master that model. Once we have identified the model, there
--- PAGE 293 ---
are a series of “facts” that we need to know in order to fully understand the
training process. With the combination of identifying our model and having
our background knowledge in place, then the process entails deciding the
details of the plan. In essence, we are looking for how far we are going to
push adaptions, in what direction they are going, and the details that
surround them. The fourth step is branching out from those details and
putting workouts into their proper place within the broader periodization
plan. Finally, we put our plan into action and then use feedback from that
athlete, races, and workouts to continually adjust throughout.
The basic outline of this book is to help you understand how to tackle
each of these sections. Up until now we have looked at the philosophical
side. We’ve identified overarching principles that form the foundation of
training design, and laid the foundation for making knowledgeable
decisions on what it is we are trying to do. From here, the following
chapters will begin to transition away from the philosophy and into the
world of detailed planning. The next chapter will be concerned with the
identification process. We will look at creating models of races, defining
workouts, and setting the stage for developing a training program. From
there we will progress to workout design and manipulation, and we will
follow this up with a chapter devoted to individual adjustments, and then
proceed into chapters on periodization and training plan development to
finish off the detail level. The process of coaching can be broken down as
follows.
Philosophical to Details approach:
1.     Identify:
a.    Event/Race Demands
b.    Race schedule
c.     Individual adjustments to demands
d.    Training adaptations we are looking for based on Model
constructed.
2.     Know
a.    What stimulus leads to those adaptations
--- PAGE 294 ---
b.    Interactions between stimuli
c.     Prerequisites for development
d.    Amplifiers and Dampeners for adaptation
e.    Periodization/Timing of development of adaptations
3.     Decide
a.    How much stimulus
b.    How much Recovery
c.     What direction to take adaptation
d.    Correct Balance throughout year
4.     Design
a.    Workout progressions
b.    Periodization/shifts in emphasis
5.     Adjust
a.    Continual adjustment of workload, emphasis, balance based on:
                                               i.     Physical
                                             ii.     Emotional
                                            iii.     Psychological
--- PAGE 295 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 297 ---
15

--- PAGE 298 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 299 ---
What Are We Trying to
Accomplish?
“When faced with a difficult question, we often answer an easier one
instead, usually without noticing the substitution.” Daniel Kahneman
 
While knowing the complexities of the science of running is good, it
is easy to lose the forest for the trees, as it is hard to wrap your head
around it all so that it can be practically applied. To circumvent this
problem, we take those complex ideas and make them into simple models.
In our case, we take the scientific knowledge and come up with simple
models of fatigue, which gives a road map on how to train to avoid
fatigue.
The great New Zealand coach Arthur Lydiard once commented that
almost anyone could run a 60 second quarter, yet very few could run four
of those in a row to string together a 4:00 mile. His point was that most of
the time endurance was the key to performance. In a similar vein, Renato
Canova stated that every event is an event of extension. The goal of
training is to be able extend your ability to last at a given pace. If your
goal is to run a 2:00 800m and in your current shape you can run that pace
for 650m, then your training goal is to extend your ability to run at that
pace until it matches your desired goal of 800m. Once that goal is reached,
you work at extending your ability to last 800m at a faster pace. This
occurs via delaying fatigue. If fatigue can be delayed at race pace, then a
runner can last longer at that pace before fatigue slows them down. On the
other hand, if one can handle greater amounts of fatigue, performance will
increase too. It is therefore the rate and maximum tolerance of fatigue that
combines to determine performance. Several models of fatigue can be
used to apply this practically, but, first, what is fatigue?
Fatigue is a catch all term that basically means we slow down. The
exact mechanisms of fatigue are unknown and vary widely for each event.
First, I’ll briefly go over the concept of fatigue, and then look at some
practical fatigue models. Fatigue has traditionally been thought of as an
issue of depletion or accumulation. Either products build up that cause
fatigue, or we run out of products that are necessary for function and
--- PAGE 300 ---
fatigue. Initially it was thought that these products were the direct causes
of fatigue, meaning if Hydrogen ions (H+) got high, it directly caused
fatigue. However, more recent research has led to different beliefs, as
discussed in the first half of this book. Some of the products believed to
play a role in fatigue are listed below:
·       Increase in H+ (decrease in pH), core temperature, ammonia,
Pi, and Magnesium
·       Decrease in blood glucose, glycogen, BCAA, and Calcium
release and uptake in the Sarcoplasmic Reticulum.
While these products can contribute to fatigue, the more recent
understanding is that none of these products directly cause fatigue, and
instead they are (or cause changes in substances that are) simply signals to
the brain that homeostasis has been changed. An increase or decrease in
these products does not directly cause the fatigue but instead signals the
brain that if we don’t change what’s going on, we’ll be in danger. So the
brain then forces the person to slow down both consciously and
subconsciously. Subconsciously it may regulate intensity via recruitment
of muscles fibers. So that when the brain is receiving signals that fatigue
is building up, it decreases muscle fiber recruitment to protect the body.
Another proposal says that fatigue is regulated consciously, in that as these
products build up or decrease, the body creates the sensation of pain, so
that then the runner slows down consciously because of the high pain
levels. Certain runners are able to delve deeper into the realms of pain
than others, but all of us eventually give in to the ever increasing pain
levels. Exactly what occurs is unknown but it is likely some combination
of conscious and subconscious interaction.
All of this is nice and good, but in training we aren’t overly
concerned with whether the products directly cause fatigue or if they
indirectly cause fatigue via feedback. The bottom line is that if we delay
the buildup of fatigue products, or delay the reduction in neural
recruitment, fatigue is delayed. If the buildup in the products themselves
causes fatigue then we are directly delaying fatigue by decreasing their
buildup with training. If the buildup of products indirectly causes fatigue
through pain or subconscious control, then delaying the product buildup
still delays the signaling to the brain to cause fatigue or pain. Either way
performance is improved. Given this information, we can take the
--- PAGE 301 ---
complex idea of fatigue and boil it down into three useful simple fatigue
models.
The Lactate or By-product theory works on the idea that fatigue is
caused by the buildup of some fatiguing by-product. We use lactate
because it is easily measurable and corresponds with fatigue, not because
it causes fatigue itself. The theory is that there is a maximum amount of
these products that can accumulate during a race, so if we can decrease the
rate of accumulation or increase the maximum amount that can be
accumulated, fatigue will be delayed and performance will improve.
Based on this theory, the training goals are as follows:
 
Lactate/By-Product Theory Training Goals:
1.     Decrease Lactate (fatigue by-products) overall
2.     Decrease Lactate accumulation at Race Pace
3.     Increase maximum Lactate that can be accumulated over race
The second fatigue theory is based on muscle fiber fatigue. In this
model, fatigue is looked at as happening because of both neural
recruitment of fibers and the endurance of the fibers themselves (or how
long a fiber can stay recruited without fatigue). As fatigue sets in, muscle
fibers begin to “fail” and other fibers are recruited to take up the slack.
Eventually, there is a point where the majority of the muscle fibers are
fatigued and cannot maintain the necessary force production, thus fatigue
occurs and the runner slows. Based on this theory, fatigue can be delayed
via increasing the recruitable fiber pool, training to be able to use those
fibers during a race, and lastly extending the endurance of those fibers
thus delaying fatigue. This theory is an integration of both peripheral (the
muscles themselves) and central (the Central Nervous System) fatigue. As
with the lactate fatigue theory, it does not matter whether there is a central
regulator or if fatigue happens peripherally in the muscles themselves, as
the training goals are still the same.
 
Muscle Fiber Theory:
1.     Increase Maximum Fibers you can recruit
2.     Increase Percent of fibers you use over race
3.     Increase length those fibers can last (endurance)
--- PAGE 302 ---
4.     Tying it together: Increase/maintain recruitment of fibers under heavy
fatigue
 
Lastly, we have the overall fatigue model, which ties together local and
central fatigue in a useable form. This theory integrates the brain and the
muscles in a sort of sensory feedback loop.
 
Simple Integrated Fatigue Model:
1.     Products of fatigue build up in the muscle.
2.     The brain monitors this increase in fatigue products and regulates
muscle recruitment to prevent muscle from reaching dangerous level of
fatigue products.
a.     Fatigue products that may signal to the brain include lactate, H+,
Ca+, heat/temperature, glycogen levels, and numerous other
triggers.
3.     Can train to:
a.     Delay buildup of these products thus delaying brain’s signal to
shut down
b.     Delay signal from brain to “shut down and protect” by proving
you can safely handle slightly more of that product.
c.     Increase maximum amount of these products that can be
accumulated or lost before the brain starts shutting things down.
 
These models of fatigue allow for practical integration of science
and training. The models provide an easy to understand way of looking at
what causes fatigue and in turn how to train to delay fatigue. As a quick
example of how to apply these models, let’s look at the muscle fiber
theory. To delay fatigue we need to increase the muscle fiber pool and
increase the endurance of those fibers. To accomplish these goals, we need
to do workouts that cause a large increase in muscle fiber recruitment such
as sprints, hill sprints, or heavy weight lifting. Following this, we need to
extend the endurance of the newly recruited fibers, so the next set of
workouts adds an endurance component. An example might be doing hill
sprints in between sets of 800m repeats at race pace. The hill sprints
would serve to recruit fibers, and then those fibers would be trained during
--- PAGE 303 ---
the 800m repeats. Another option is to do long uphill repeats as more
muscle fibers are recruited during uphill running then flat running.
 
Event Modeling
The goal should be to use these simple theories of fatigue and
combine them with a template for each race. We can use our knowledge of
physiology and then also look at traditional pacing of the event to
understand how to combat fatigue. Let’s go through a few events as
examples.
First, we know that in the middle distance events (800/1500) we
have a rapid buildup of fatigue contributing by-products. If we are to look
at the energetics of it we know that the anaerobic system revs up first,
covering the gap in energy needed until the aerobic system catches up to
cover the majority, but not all, of the energy provided before once again
calling on whatever anaerobic reserve we have at the end to kick.
In the 800m, the energy supply is higher so more anaerobic energy
is needed to cover the gap between energy required and what the aerobic
system can contribute. Additionally if we look at pacing strategies in the
800m, it is essentially a gradual decline in speed with maybe a
maintaining or, at best, a very slight increase in the last 200. What that
tells us is that compared to the longer events, we use our anaerobic reserve
earlier in the 800 to maintain the pace, and therefore there’s nothing to call
upon. In the 1,500m, it’s just slightly slower, and thus most times we are
able to call upon some extra anaerobic reserve to kick.
If we look at what happens muscle fiber wise, there’s a steady
increase of muscle fiber activation of both fast twitch and slow twitch
fibers, before we try recruiting as much as we can as fibers fatigue in the
closing stages. Generally, what we see is a decrease in force into the
ground, which can be seen by increased time spent on the ground or
changes in stride length or rate. We’ve got plenty of glycogen and other
stores of energy, except for phosphocreatine, but that’s almost a bonus, so
depletion isn’t really an issue. It also isn’t long enough to have
overheating be an issue. So what we are left with is mostly buildup of by-
products causing an increase in pain/RPE that eventually shuts us down.
--- PAGE 304 ---
In the distance events of the 5k and 10k, we have a similar yet
subtly different picture. We can get a glimpse of the demands by looking
at the optimal pacing, which essentially looks like a mostly even paced
race with a larger kick in at the end. The energetic demands can largely be
met aerobically, so that the anaerobic reserve is just used to fill the gap in
the beginning and then once fatigue sets in or it’s time to kick. The muscle
fibers recruited are still a mix, but we can rely on a larger proportion of
slow twitch fibers in the beginning and rotate through recruiting them to a
degree, before calling upon the harder to recruit fibers as fatigue grows.
Additionally, if we look at the buildup of products, there isn’t a rapid rise,
but instead a slight and gradual increase throughout the race, with maybe a
peak at the end once we delve into our anaerobic reserves.
However, there is an exception in a select group of elite athletes
who have really well-developed aerobic systems, where we might even
see a leveling off of the buildup of things such as lactate mid race. The
athletes reach a steady state that is normally reserved for longer races.
Though this is rare, the point is that it’s a much more nuanced increase in
most athletes who fit the bill of a 5k or 10k specialist.
In addition to the normal fatigue causing “stuff” such as lactate, pH
changes, acidosis or whatever buzz word you want to describe it as, we
also see buildup of heat and changes in core temperature affecting these
races, especially the 10k. Depending on the ambient temperature, if it is
warm enough, reaching a critical core temperature could be a real
possibility. Then we see fatigue occurring as a result of this rise in
temperature, and often get an anticipatory slowing down because of it.
Psychologically, dealing with concentration and focus becomes a
larger component of the fatigue picture as we have a larger period of time
under strong, but not extremely high (as in the 800m), duress. So what we
are left with is distance events where buildup plays a role, as does changes
in muscle fiber recruitment and neural activation, but at a more
gradual/subtler pace than with the mid distance events.
Lastly, we’re left with the longest event that I’ll cover, the marathon.
The marathon changes the fatigue paradigm. While building up fatigue
products is still an issue, what they are changes. Instead of it being things
that people mostly associate with anaerobic metabolism, such as changes
in pH, we are left with buildup of more central parameters, such as heat,
--- PAGE 305 ---
changes in certain chemicals in the brain, or a few other items. The rise in
core temperature is one of the more likely causes of fatigue in conditions
that are either warm or humid.
The main cause of fatigue though is the depletion of fuel. While we
never fully run out of fuel, it is the anticipation of running out of fuel that
ultimately causes the slowing. Think of it as if your car ran a calculation
using your current fuel economy and how long you have till your
destination. With this calculation it projected whether you could make it to
your destination before the low fuel light turned on. If it can, great, you
continue at your same fuel economy and speed. But if it can’t, then it will
automatically slow you down until your efficient enough to make it to
your destination before you get that flashing warning light. You never run
out of fuel, but your car is being overprotective to make sure that you have
just enough left in case it’s life or death, and that’s what the low fuel light
represents.
This process is more or less what your brain and body do, except
that as humans running a marathon, our efficiency can get significantly
worse as we go along in our trip. So our brain might make some late
adjustments that cause us to have to make drastic slow downs. One way in
which this might happen is through mechanical damage. The damage
caused by 26.2 miles of pounding could cause muscle fibers that you were
expecting to do work to not be able to handle their load due to micro
tearing or other damage. Even if you don’t get full blown muscle
cramping because of fatigue, it may be enough to change your gait and
thus increase the energy cost per mile. So what we are left with is
worrying mostly about depletion, a moderate amount of concern for
whether we can withstand the mechanical demands, and then, depending
on the circumstances, a small amount of buildup.
The last step is to adjust these models for the individual, which will
be covered in depth in a chapter to come. But the basic premise of it is that
our individual differences will shift the race model more aerobic or
anaerobic, power or strength, or any other combination of differences. As
a quick example, if we have a speed orientated 800m runner versus an
endurance one, for the speed athlete, the 800m is more anaerobic, will
create a larger buildup of by-products, and most likely recruit a larger
percent of their fast twitch muscle mass.
--- PAGE 306 ---
 All of these factors shift the model and how we train for the event.
It is perhaps even more pertinent in the longer distance events because
individual physiology can shift the components of the race model to a
very high degree. A marathoner who is efficient at 10k, may not have the
fuel capacity, or the ability to withstand the damage, that someone with
more of a longer background and shuffling stride. While this is not meant
to be a complete overview of each race, I hope that it is enough of a guide
to create a template for the demands of each race. Now that we understand
what the goals of training are and have models from which to work, it’s
time to look at classifying the training.
 
General to Specific: A Classification
System
There are an endless number of workouts that can be done. How do
you decide which one to do and at what time to do it? It’s an overly
complex task that needs to be simplified. A workout classification system
is used to aid in this simplification. The majority of workout classification
systems work off of creating zones based on physiological parameters. For
example, a classic structure would be to have a supramaximal, VO2max,
Lactate Threshold, and Easy zone system. The problem with such as
system is it works off the premise that these zones are the only or the
optimal way to enhance those parameters, which we know is false. In
addition, it assumes that these parameters are what matters in race
performance, which is not entirely true as even when combined these
parameters fail to explain performance better than a test using running
speed.
Instead of using such a zoning scheme, we’ll use a system that was
popularized in Renato Canova’s A Scientific Approach to the Marathon
but has been used in Europe for over 30 years and is common in sprint and
power events for classification. The advantage of such a system is that the
focus is on what matters: running speed. Instead of using physiological
parameters, it focuses on how closely the workout or run you are doing
replicates the desired race. Why does that matter? Because of the training
law of specificity.
--- PAGE 307 ---
The ultimate goal of training is to race a particular distance at a
certain pace. The goal race pace and distance are specific training.
According to the law of specificity, it is what matters most. This makes
sense from a physiological perspective too, as running at race pace is the
only way to mimic the exact muscle fiber recruitment pattern and
fatiguing by-product buildup that will occur in a race. Does that mean that
all we should do is train at race pace? Absolutely not, other paces and
intensities are needed to elicit adaptation and support the specific training.
Specific training, which can be defined as your goal race pace plus or
minus a few percent, simply serves as the basis from which to start our
classification system. If our goal race were the 5000m, then specific
would refer to goal 5k pace plus or minus a few seconds per mile on either
side.
Before looking at the classification system, a couple of points need
to be made. First, there are no magical training zones that maximize
adaptation or “dead” space where adaptation is less. The body responds to
the demand it is placed under, thus every training pace will impart a
slightly different stimulus. Certain stimuli will be needed at different
times throughout the season, but the take away message is that there are
no magic stimuli or “dead” zones. Many runners get caught up in only
running at certain intensities, while completely neglecting the in between
speeds. This is often seen in American runners where there is little
training, if any, done at the speeds between lactate threshold and normal
distance run pace. When such a wide range of speeds is neglected, there is
a wide array of stimuli and adaptations that the runner is missing out on.
Second, every pace is connected. We tend to think of training in
isolation. Instead of having abrupt training zones, whether it is based on
physiological zones or race paces, there is a large degree of interaction
between every intensity. What this means is that the classification system
should be thought of as a spectrum starting with your specific race pace
and branching out, without any abrupt zones. Instead of abrupt zones,
each category blends into the next. Each training intensity supports the
preceding and proceeding intensities. The only reason we have defined
zones is to make it practical and useable. Even when training in a certain
“zone,” it’s important to remember that progression must exist and that
there is no exact pace that needs to be hit within that zone. Instead, the
--- PAGE 308 ---
pace of the workout or run is dependent on what the goal of the session is
and where you are at in the training phase, which will be discussed in
detail later in the book. With the idea that the classification system is
really more of a spectrum with a connection of all of the so-called zones,
the chart below represents the entire classification system.
 
Specific training is defined as the goal race pace for your particular
event, plus or minus a few seconds per 400m. The plus or minus refers to
the fact that in a given race it is very unlikely that a runner will have
exactly even splits. Therefore, specific pace represents the goal pace with
an allowance on either side for expected differences in pace. An example
for an 800m runner aiming for 1:48, which is 54sec per lap, would be to
consider anything from around 52 to 56sec per lap to be specific because
those are the paces that he will expect to hit in an 800m race. Branching
out from specific, we get what is termed support training. Note that we are
branching out on both the speed and the endurance side. In the original
German classification, this was termed special training, but the term
support has replaced special in the American training lexicon. Support
training refers to the training that is just a step or two further away from
specific training and serves the purpose of supporting the specific work
that is done. Support training can be divided into two classifications,
direct support and anaerobic/aerobic support. Direct support refers to the
training intensity that is directly connected to specific speed. In this case it
refers to about one race distance slower and one race distance faster than
specific speed. On the speed side I refer to this as direct speed support,
--- PAGE 309 ---
and on the endurance side it is direct endurance support. Working down
the ladder, the next step is aerobic support, which is that training which is
connected to direct endurance support, or the race distance about 2
distances slower than specific speed. On the other side is anaerobic
support, which refers to an intensity about 2 race distances faster than the
specific pace.
 
Support Training Paces:
General training refers to intensities that are 3 to 4 race distances
faster or slower. At General endurance training we run out of typical race
distances to use to define the pace in many instances. For that reason,
we’ll use the words “steady” as the next pace up from marathon pace and
“easy” as the next pace up from that. Steady refers to a pace that is
generally 5-10% slower than marathon pace, or, in other terms, it’s a good
consistent pace that requires some focus to run but is not tiring. Easy
refers to paces that are up to around 25-30% slower than marathon pace
and represents what is used on most normal distance runs. Finally,
recovery refers to any training that is slower than general training and is
meant not to build fitness but instead to aid in recovery and adaptation.
Neuromuscular refers to pure sprint work.
General Training Paces:
--- PAGE 310 ---
Please note that I used the word “about” to describe the paces each
classification refers to. This was on purpose because I do not want to give
the impression that these are intensity zones that are strict and absolute and
that anything falling outside these zones is worthless. The reality is that
each classification level should blend into the next one. Contrary to the
zone theory of training, we now know that there are no magical training
intensities and that instead the intensities are connected, with each intensity
influencing the next. In essence, there is interaction, not isolation. In the
subsequent chapters, each classification level will be explained. For now,
let’s focus on how they interact and why this is important.
 
A Different Kind of Base: Training
Intensity Interaction
Traditional training models have used a pyramid system that states
that a large block of endurance is the base and then that layered on top of
that is blocks of ever increasing intensity until you reach the top, which is
the “speed” training that brings about top shape. The central asset of this
theory is that it acknowledges that there is interaction between training
intensities. Certain types of training should precede other types. An
example is a large block of endurance work is needed before moving to
faster threshold type work. The reason for this is because of the
connections and interactions among training intensities.
If one were to jump straight into faster work with no base, one of
two things would likely happen. First, they would get injured because they
were not adapted to the workload. Second,  they make it through the
workouts without injury, but the total amount of work is severely limited.
In this sense, peak shape could not be reached, and whatever shape they
--- PAGE 311 ---
do reach would not last very long. The general endurance training would
help to alleviate these two problems. It would develop the runner’s
musculoskeletal, metabolic, and neuromuscular systems to be able to
handle the faster training and allow them to handle a much higher
workload before they break down. Each training intensity interacts in this
way. Each level of intensity described in the classification model
discussed earlier serves to support the next level of intensity. If the end
goal is increasing an athlete’s specific endurance, then there is a chain
reaction that occurs, starting with general training. If we increase general
training that in turn increases the quality and amount of aerobic support
training that can be done, which increases the amount and quality of direct
support, which finally increases the amount and quality of specific
training. With an increased ability to handle specific training, specific
endurance is improved. Or stated in another way, the runner can now
handle more work at a specific pace before fatigue sets in, which we know
directly enhances performances.
As you can see, each level of training has an effect on the
subsequent level. The flow is only as good as its weakest link. Therefore,
in certain situations increasing the amount of general endurance will do
nothing in terms of increasing specific endurance if the weak link is at
direct support. Instead, training of aerobic support or direct support may
be needed to stop the clogging that occurs at direct support. That is where
the art of deciding how much emphasis should be focused on each level
comes into play, which will be discussed in a later chapter.
The original pyramid does a fine job of demonstrating this process
from the endurance side. The problem is that it ignores the whole other
side of the spectrum. As speed and intensity are increased, the athletes
have the endurance background to handle it, but not the speed or
neuromuscular background. What normally happens when athletes follow
the traditional pyramid model is that they get to the speed work and either
get very sore or they rapidly adapt to the workload, peak, and then have a
rapid decline in performance. Why spend so much time gradually adapting
on one side of the spectrum while letting the other side be thrown into the
fire when it is time to introduce “speed”. What we need is a different kind
of base.
 
--- PAGE 312 ---
The Multifaceted Base
The multifaceted base means that instead of creating a base of just
aerobic running, we are establishing a metabolic, neuromuscular, and
structural foundation. As discussed earlier, the idea of constructing an
endurance base is sound, but what needs to be added is the base on which
to build speed. In other words, the endurance base works from the top
down towards specificity, while the speed base should work from the
bottom up.
A speed base will provide several benefits. First, it will establish a
neuromuscular foundation off of which to work. Thinking back to the
muscle fiber fatigue theory, two of the central premises are that an
increase in total muscle fiber pool will enhance performance and that
extending the endurance of newly recruited fibers will enhance
performance. The ideal way to increase muscle fiber recruitment is
through high force activities like sprinting. During the base phase of
training, just as you do a lot of general aerobic running, you should do a
lot of general speed training, which includes workouts such as sprints.
Working up the pyramid, it only makes sense that if speed
endurance is to be trained, speed must be trained first. Thus, a base of pure
speed training is needed before attempting to extend that speed. Speed
endurance is a critical factor for shorter distance races like the 800m and
1500m and of importance for Fast Twitch (FT) type runners. For Slow
Twitch (ST) runners or longer distance runners the support phase of the
pyramid serves not as a hard anaerobic workout but as a way to get the
runners relaxed at a faster speed, maintain their FT fibers while doing high
volumes, and improve biomechanics and muscle fiber recruitment
patterns. For ST runners, this support phase could consist of a simple
workout such as 8x200m at 2 mile down to mile pace with 200m jog. The
idea in such a workout is to get them comfortable at slightly faster speeds,
that way when it is time to do specific training or “speed” training like in
the traditional model, it is gradually brought about and the runners are
ready for it. This will be discussed in detail in later chapters.
The bottom line is that not only do runners need to have an
endurance foundation off of which to build, but they also need a speed
foundation. This does not mean that they should be doing hard interval
--- PAGE 313 ---
sessions during the base phase. That is not speed training for the base
phase. Please refer to the charts to see what a foundation of speed is all
about. Lastly, it should be noted that the original pyramid referred to
volume and intensity, in that volume should be high at the beginning and
decrease as the season progresses. The Multifaceted Base Model does not
refer to the volume/intensity interaction.
Multifaceted Base Pyramid Model
Periodization
While a more in depth discussion on how to plan the training will be
done in a later chapter, it is important to understand some of the ideas
before discussing the details of each training classification. The
multifaceted base pyramid should provide a good summary on my views.
A base of both speed and endurance is required before funneling towards
specificity on both sides, eventually meeting in the middle. As making
complex concepts simple is the theme, the following statements can
succinctly summarize proper periodization:
 
Start backwards. Work the extremes. Bring it together. Never leave
anything behind. Progress everything.
 
--- PAGE 314 ---
Let’s break each statement down a little bit. ‘Work the extremes’ and
‘bring it together’ have already been discussed and should be obvious.
They refer to starting out on the extremes of speed and endurance and
bring them together working towards specificity. That is the general
direction that the main workouts will go. ‘Start backwards’ refers to the
idea of knowing where you want to end up. It is impossible to plan
training if you don’t know where you want to go. Thus first look at the
goal races and decide what it is you want to accomplish. Only then is it
possible to start gearing the training towards that goal.
Perhaps most important is the statement ‘never leave anything
behind’. This statement focuses on what I call the build and maintain
principle. Rather than moving from one type of training to the next and
leaving the preceding training behind, I believe that instead of subtracting
something, we should always try to add and build off of our training. Once
a type of training is introduced, it stays in the training program.
I know what you’re thinking, how do we fit it all in? While the
training stimulus remains in the program, its emphasis changes. That’s
where the maintain part of the ‘build and maintain’ idea comes in.
Research has demonstrated that it takes a lot more training to build a
particular parameter than it does to maintain it. Maintenance only requires
a little spurt of that type of training every now and then. The key is that
we don’t neglect it so that detraining occurs.
The ‘never leave anything behind’ statement also pertains to the idea
that we almost never should have a period of training when it is entirely
one stimulus. Other stimuli should not be neglected for that long. It
doesn’t have to be much, sometimes 100m strides will do for a speed
stimulus, but there should not be total neglect. Obviously there are some
times when this principle is violated such as when coming back from
injuries or a layoff, but for athletes in serious training it holds true. This
concept can best be remembered and summarized by the idea that every
component of the training system is included in the training at all times,
just the emphasis on each component changes throughout the year.
Lastly is the idea of ‘progress everything’. Thinking back to the
theories of adaptation, one of the central tenets of adaptation is the idea of
supercompensation. Your body reacts to a particular stress by adapting to
it and rising to the next level. When this occurs, a new stimulus must be
--- PAGE 315 ---
applied to raise adaptation to the next level. Given this idea, progression is
paramount. Workouts should be progressed to ensure adaptation. This can
occur one of many ways, including a change in total volume, speed,
decreased recovery, repeat length, or even how an athlete goes into the
workout. This last idea is often neglected, but an athlete can repeat the
same workout and still have it be a progression if they go into the workout
more fatigued or have the workouts surrounding it contain more mileage
or intense running than usual. This is particularly important in regards to
specific training. If the goal is to increase specific endurance via delaying
fatigue, then a gradual increase in the stress is the only way to accomplish
this goal. This gradual progression means that the athlete is adapting to the
workload. If at any time the athlete is not able to handle the progression
for an unknown reason, then it is time to back off and recover, as the
athlete’s adaptation ability is probably low. There is one exception to the
rule of progression. When a training type enters maintenance mode, we
are no longer trying to build, so progression is not needed.
A more in depth look at periodization cannot occur until we
understand the details of workout types. Now that we have the basic
concepts of what we are trying to accomplish, the nest step is to delve into
the details of each type of workout.
--- PAGE 316 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 318 ---
16

--- PAGE 319 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 320 ---
Creating and Manipulating
Workouts
“Poor hitters make the best hitting coaches. They don’t try to make
you like them, because they sucked.” Moneyball
 
Designing workouts is the step we all skip over. It’s one of those jobs
that appears so simple that we just gloss right over it. Everyone wants to
know what the workout does and what adaptation it targets. That’s the sexy
part of coaching. Knowing that doing a 4mile tempo at X effort will give Y
result is the basis of the majority of coaches’ education, and it is an
important first step. But once we understand what we are trying to
accomplish when training, we need to stop and think about what it is we are
creating.
The reality is that it’s human nature to be stuck. We can only process
so many items at once so it requires much less time and energy to simply
give a workout we were given, have read, or saw someone else do than to
come up with one ourselves. After all, if Roger Bannister did 10x400, and
that’s the stimulus we are looking for, then 10x400 it is. It’s lazy coaching.
My goal is to challenge you as a coach and prevent what I call lazy cookie
cutter coaching. In order to accomplish this, we will go back to the
beginning and cover the fascinating topic of workout design.
Traditionally in endurance coaching, we have decided what zone we
want to target and then simply manipulated the speed and distance to target
that zone. If we look at any of the handy training charts for workout design,
they will typically look like something like this:
 
While there may be some variants, as some might include HR or
lactate for instance, the principle is the same in that we pick a zone that
--- PAGE 321 ---
gives the desired adaptation. Then we simply plug in a workout that fits the
rep length, recovery, speed, and total volume. Not a lot of thought is given
to exactly what the workout is beyond making sure it falls into this broad
category.
The reality is that we need to take a slight step back from this zone-
dominated system and instead realize that the workout details matter a little
more than we have acknowledged in the past. The details matter because it
decides the amount of stimulus and thus the overload we are applying and
in what direction that overload is applied. It’s not enough to hit the right
zone. This becomes even more important when we step back and look at
how a particular workout fits and changes throughout the season. We need
to know if we are progressing that adaptation and if we are, then in what
direction is it progressing from workout to workout.
If we look at models of stress and adaptation from the first part of this
book, then we know that how much we overload influences how much we
adapt, given that enough recovery is present. If we look at it
physiologically, in order to improve a particular component we have to
challenge homeostasis. So, we have to delve a little deeper into the depths
of glycogen depletion to get the body to respond and make us utilize
glycogen a little more efficiently. Or if we are improving strength, we need
to have just enough micro-tears so that the body responds with repairing
and making that muscle stronger. Essentially, we need to embarrass the
body just enough so that it decides it is more prepared next time it faces that
challenge.
 
Steps for Workout Design
 
Step 1: Adaptation and Direction
The first step therefore is to decide what adaptation we are in search
of. This is where we combine knowledge of science and practical
experience to decide what needs to be done. While this is covered in depth
in the earlier sections of the book, the decision making on what adaptation
is needed is dependent on the time of the season, the individual athlete’s
physiological makeup, and the race demands. These factors combine to let
you know when it is best to work on the various components of endurance
--- PAGE 322 ---
and speed. Then it becomes a simple decision of deciding what qualities to
target, whether it’s specific endurance, strength, biomechanical adaptations,
or any other quality.
The other decision is based on what direction we want to improve a
quality. For instance if we are training for the 5k and decide that we need to
do specific endurance work, we may do 4xmile at 5:00 pace with 3min rest.
We have decided that the goal is to work on specific endurance, but then the
next time we do specific endurance work, we need to decide in what
direction to progress the workout. Do we increase the volume or speed, or
do we simply reduce the rest. This topic will be covered shortly, but it’s
important to know that what direction you choose to take the workout and
thus the adaptation is a critical component in designing workouts.
Step 2: Build or Maintain
The next step is to decide whether the goal is to build or maintain the
quality. As described at the beginning of this chapter, in my system we are
either in a period of emphasis or maintenance. When we are emphasizing a
particular component we are trying to improve its capacity, while when we
are in maintenance mode the goal is obviously to do enough to simply
maintain that parameter. This choice determines the volume and intensity of
the workout in relation to what the athlete has done in the past. For
example, if an athlete has done a 4mile tempo at 5:20 pace in the past, to
maintain his high end aerobic abilities we might need to only do 3miles at
5:20 pace, while to build that parameter we might need to do 5miles at 5:20
pace or 4miles at 5:15 pace, depending on what direction we are trying to
build that quality.
Once it has been decided to build a quality, the idea is to design a
workout that embarrasses the body to some degree. We are assuming that
once we complete the workout, we adapt to it if we provide enough
recovery, nutrition, and support around the workout. So that the next time
we do a workout trying to progress that same adaptation we have to change
something to make it a slightly stronger stimulus. We change because if we
did our job right, the body adapted. So if we did the exact same workout as
before, we would presumably have less stress than before. As an example, if
we did 10x400 in 60sec with 60sec rest and our lactate levels reached 18,
the next time we did that same exact workout we would hope our lactate
--- PAGE 323 ---
might max out at 17. We adapted, so now to keep adapting, something has
to change. That is why the workout details matter.
 
Step 3: Degree of Overload
With this concept in mind, there are a couple of different questions
that need to be asked when progressing one workout to the next. First, how
big of a stimulus overload do we need? If the first time we did those 400’s
in 60sec with 60sec rest, do we try to do them in 55 now or 59? Or do we
change every variable and try to do 12 in 58 with 40sec rest. The answer to
that question depends on how big of an adaptation are you looking for.
Theoretically, the greater the stimulus then the greater the adaptation, IF
there is enough rest and support. The problem though is that you risk having
the athlete fail, and you risk maladaptation because the athlete was pushed
into overtraining and failed to adapt because the stimulus was too much or
the recovery too short.
In general, I’m a big believer in very gradually increasing the
stimulus of the workout. There are times when we can go for a big stimulus,
but those should be planned in advance with ample recovery going in and
coming out of it. So you might ask if there is a time we don’t progress a
workout or if we indefinitely increase the demands of the workout? The
simple answer is that yes there is a time when we do not progress a workout
or when we might even reduce the stress of the workout. The two scenarios
where we would do this would be if we are trying to maintain a fitness
component and are no longer trying to progress it and if we are trying to
cement an adaptation. In maintenance mode, you may recall that it’s easier
to maintain a component then to build it up, so reduced workloads are often
used as a maintenance workout. When cementing a workout, you wouldn’t
progress the stimulus because you’re trying to make sure that the athlete
really has adapted.
Ultimately the progressing of workouts and training stimulus depends
on how the athlete adapts. If the athlete isn’t adapting, then don’t progress
it. It seems obvious, but it is a key concept to understand. How fast and far
workouts progress depends on how the athlete adapts. It should be an
athlete-driven process and not a purely mathematical one in which we
simply increase the stress of the workout every single time.
--- PAGE 324 ---
 
Going to the Well
Before leaving this discussion and moving towards how to progress
workouts, we need to briefly elaborate on what kind of effort the workouts
should entail. There is a debate between training to complete failure
versus having something left in the tank. The problem with training to
complete exhaustion is that it is very hard on the nervous system, the
endocrine system, the immune system, and psychologically. If we adapt to
the huge workout, then as mentioned above, we get a large training
adaptation. The issue is that it’s a high risk, high reward venture. As
previously mentioned, how hard the workout is should be determined by
the recoverability, the degree of overload sought, and the time of the
season.
We can use research on learning to give us some insight into this
process. Both over and under stimulation of the brain have the same
effect, and that is an inability to differentiate trivial and important stimuli.
This explains why working too hard or not being challenged enough can
lead to the same end result, apathy. This is an issue that teachers face
every day, finding the right degree of challenge in the classroom to make
sure that bright students are challenged enough to prevent apathy, while
students on the other side of the coin aren’t overly challenged so that they
“overtrain” and get apathetic about the work.
The same concept applies to the challenge of training. We have this
sweet spot that I’ll call the optimal challenge window. This window shifts
from day to day based on both psychological and physiological factors.
What we are trying to do is find the right challenge based on what we are
trying to accomplish. During very hard workouts we might want to push
the envelope and work the higher edges of that window, while during
moderate workouts we might want to be on the lower end. The key with
this concept is that we are looking for an optimal challenge for our
training goal. In general, we are looking for enough of a challenge to
stimulate the adaptations we need, but not so much that we overwhelm the
system.
External and internal factors can shift both the size of the window
and also where it lies along the continuum of challenge. As coaches, we
--- PAGE 325 ---
know this intuitively, as we’ve seen runners come out to a workout and
not be able to handle something that they were fit enough to handle. When
we delve deeper into the issue, most of the times, the reason for this
perceived failure is because of lack of sleep, or a stressful test before, or
some external factors. We have both negative and positive stressors that
can increase or decrease the size of the window or shift its place on the
continuum. We need to keep this in mind when planning workouts. When
we are scheduling “go the well” workouts, for example, we need to ensure
that the optimal window is shifted as far to the right as possible, as we
want the challenge to be very high, but not so high that we are not at least
somewhat able to handle it. Therefore, going into workouts like these, we
need to be well rested both physiologically and psychologically.
 
 
My High School coach, Gerald Stewart, called it going to the well.
There are only so many times an athlete can go to the well before the well
runs dry. For this reason, the majority of work should be done within your
limits feeling like it was a good hard session but that you could have gone
a little further or done one more repeat if need be. Remember that the goal
of training is not to prove yourself in practice, but to cause progressive
adaptation. Or as my High School coach would say, you need to win more
workouts than you lose, meaning that you are in control of the workout,
not struggling to hang on.
--- PAGE 326 ---
This train but don’t strain idea popularized by Arthur Lydiard
applies to the vast majority of the training. Occasionally, there will be a
time when, to use a phrase Coach Stewart coined, you need to have a “see
god” day. Races themselves are very intense efforts, so on rare occasions,
the effort needs to be similar. Usually these see god days are reserved for a
small number of key specific sessions that essentially function in the place
of a race. The recovery going into and out of these sessions should be
increased. Maximal effort workouts are the exception to the rule though,
and for the vast majority of hard workouts, the motto of “train don’t
strain” applies. In essence, let the workout come to you, don’t force it.
Choosing the Right Direction
Now that we know why we need to adjust workouts and how much to
adjust them by, we can move onto the next step of how to do so. In the
traditional model, we might change speed or rest or maybe volume up a bit.
There’s an over reliance on always trying to go faster on all workouts, so
that is typically how people increase the stress of the workout. The problem
with this line of thinking is that if that is the case then we really only adjust
workouts in one direction. The reality is that how we change the workout
alters what adaptation we get.
Once you are freed from the constraints of a zone-dominated system,
you will quickly realize how many tools are available. The more tools in the
toolbox, the more unique problems and situations you can solve. You are no
longer constrained to that tiresome repeat of the standard workouts. But
more importantly, it’s to prevent the situation where you get to that point
where something goes wrong, as it almost always inevitably does in
distance running, and you have nowhere to turn because you are stuck in
that little box of training and can’t think outside of it because of the
confines of the system you decided to marry. The goal is to embrace the
freedom and creativity of being able to design workouts to work with you
as a runner.
Given any run or workout, there are a few variables we have to
manipulate. There is what I call the typical ones that every coach in the
world uses and then there is a more complete list. There’s nothing wrong
with the typical list. It has proved its worth through the years and should be
used during the vast majority of the manipulations of a workout. But the
--- PAGE 327 ---
advanced list allows you to have fun, take adaptation to the next level, and
really just allows for more tools in the toolbox.
 
The “Typical” List:
1.     Rep distance
2.     Total volume
3.     Rest between interval
4.     Speed
This shouldn’t come as a surprise as these are the variables we have
considered up until now. We typically focus on manipulating the volume,
speed, and recovery of a particular workout or run. These are self-
explanatory, and I won’t belabor the point by explaining how to manipulate
each workout. The key is understanding what changing each workout does.
Often, we don’t take the time to think about how changing a workout
affects adaptation because with the above manipulators it is almost
intuitive. That being said, let’s take a quick look. The simplest way to
change a workout is by running the same type of workout just a little bit
faster. When an athlete does this, we associate it with improved fitness, but
what actually happens? If we’re able to run the same interval set but faster,
that means we’ve increased our ability to tolerate or accumulate fatigue. As
a quick example, if we can do 10x400 with 60sec rest in 58 versus 60
before, we theoretically can now run 58sec per 400 and accumulate the
same fatigue as if we were running 60sec. So we’ve increased our ability to
tolerate fatigue and improved in the direction of speed.
On the other hand if we are able to do 10x400 in 60sec but now with
40sec rest, we’ve increased our ability to recover, which means we’ve
improved our ability to clear or use fatiguing by-products. We’re able to do
the same total workload at the same speed but now need less recovery to do
it, so we’ve increased our ability to recover which normally is tied to our
aerobic system being able to clear things out better during the rest.
If we take the same workout and instead of doing 400’s, we do
8x500m at the same pace with the same rest, now we’ve increased our
ability to endure at that pace, or in other words we’ve increased our specific
--- PAGE 328 ---
endurance for that speed. We’re now able to lengthen the distance we can
spend at a pace. So we’re able to slow the buildup of fatigue slightly longer
and increase our ability to endure. And lastly, if we were to do the same
400m workout but instead do 12 repeats, we’ve increased our general
endurance. In other words our total workload capacity or stress capacity has
increased. We’re able to handle a higher total workload then before.
As I mentioned before, most of the changes that take place with these
adaptations are self-evident. If we are able to increase speed, we improve in
the direction of speed; if we handle longer reps, we increase our ability to
endure, and so forth. The next step is to go over some of the more complex
ways to manipulate a workout and expand the toolbox a bit.
 
The Entire Toolbox
The expanded toolbox is meant to open up the possibility of
challenging the runner and adaptation in as many possible ways. That
doesn’t mean that we need to use every single workout manipulator listed
below just because we have access to that tool. Instead, we should look
towards using the right manipulator for the right adaptation. The reality is
that we will use some of these manipulators much more so than others and
may only need to call upon some of these very rarely. It is like painting a
picture and having a full array of colors to use instead of the seven basic
colors to choose from. We may only need the color teal once, but having the
ability to, means that we can paint a more complete picture.
The key to remember is that how you manipulate the workout
determines what adaptation we get, whether it’s toward speed, or
endurance, or how fatigue is handled and dealt with. Remember that the
body adapts to what it is “embarrassed” by, so when using the manipulators
below, think of the ways in which they would “embarrass” or challenge
homeostasis. Then you have your answer on what direction the adaptation is
taking place in.
 
The Full List of Manipulators:
1)    Speed
a.     Within reps, workout
--- PAGE 329 ---
2)    Recovery
a.     Length (between reps, between sets)
b.     Standing/jogging/steady/with “stuff”
3)    Rep length
4)    Terrain
a.     Hill, soft, hard, variable, etc.
5)    Volume (total/sets)
6)    Density
7)    “Stuff”
a.     Aerobic/clearing
b.     Sprint
c.     Strength
8)    Surges
9)    Feedback manipulators
a.     Knowledge of splits, reps, distance of reps, total workout,
terrain, etc.
Speed Manipulation
Before, we looked at manipulating speed as simply getting faster over
the run or repeat, but there are more ways to look at speed than just this
simple method. We can also change speed within repeats or within the total
workout to get different adaptations. For example, we can either positive or
negative split a workout. By negative splitting, we are working on
recruiting more fibers as we go along and gradually ramping up the stress,
as well as ingraining a positive psychological mindset towards finishing
fast. On the other hand, we can “positive split” where we initially go out
faster than our normal pace or have the first reps faster. This could be done
to adapt to getting out fast in a race or to inject some fatigue or lactate into
--- PAGE 330 ---
the system before slightly slowing and getting the body used to processing
or dealing with that fatigue. In this sense, going out hard and then settling
can be a way to train the removal and use of some fatiguing by-products.
We can go beyond these ideas and vary speed within the total workout
too. Instead of simply going in one direction, we can vary the pace of each
rep or set distance. For example, if we are doing 9x600m repeats at around
5k pace (1:48 for example), we might do every 3rd one in 1:42 to work on
injecting speed and fatigue into the workout before settling back into race
rhythm for the next few reps. Similarly, varying the pace within each rep
allows for further challenge and adaptation. Instead of adapting to a steady
rhythm and pace, vary it within the rep, creating the ability both mentally
and physically to alter pace throughout a distance. If we were doing
4x2000, instead of running each rep at 5:00min mile pace, or 75sec a lap,
we can work on our ability to handle a surge by going 80, 68, 75, 72, 70. Or
from a physiological point of view, we could work on using lactate or
fatigue with laps of 65, 75, 80, 75, and 70. Oftentimes, I will use varying
paces within reps to work on tactical race preparation and what it entails to
change rhythms biomechanically. We know physiologically that when we
change out of a rhythm, it takes the body a little time to adjust the
breathing, heart rate, etc. to the new level. So what we work on is
physiologically getting the body to adjust more quickly without putting the
athlete in a hole. And, biomechanically, what we work on is how increases
in pace don’t require some big elaborate change in running form but instead
slight subtle adjustments, whether it’s an increase in arm stroke or in
turnover. The possibilities for pace adjustments are endless based on what
physiological, psychological, or biomechanical component you are trying to
adapt too.
The result of varying the pace can be many faceted. Depending how
it’s done, we can work on fatigue tolerance, removal, accumulation, or
production. We can also work on numerous psychological components,
such as getting runners used to going out over their head and staying
relaxed, working on varying paces above and below their comfort rhythm,
or finishing progressively faster. How you manipulate the speed determines
what adaptation you get.
 
--- PAGE 331 ---
Recovery and “Stuff”
When we think about recovery between repeats, what first comes to
mind is how long and whether it is jogging or standing. As you might
expect, we can actually go far beyond this simple dichotomy and look at
many ways to vary recovery. We can separate them into adjustments by
length or style.
Adjustments of the length of the recovery should be self-explanatory,
but most of the time people think of it only in terms of recovery between
repeats. Instead, we can also vary the recovery by breaking the workout into
sets and having much longer recovery between sets than we would between
reps. By having long rest between sets, we can get the best of both worlds
and challenge the athletes with shorter recovery, while ensuring that we can
get an adequate volume of work done by inserting relatively longer breaks
in the middle of the workout. Breaking workouts into sets is a great way to
introduce a workout, with the goal over the next several weeks of being
able to work down to doing the workout with no set breaks. For example,
working down from 3 sets of 3x800 with 90sec rest with 5min between sets
towards 9x800 with 90sec rest by the end of the season.
The way we vary the recovery impacts the workout demands and the
subsequent adaptation. If we shorten the recovery, the aerobic demands of
the workout actually increase. While this may seem counterintuitive, it
occurs because there is no time for our anaerobic systems to recover
between repeats. If instead we had a longer recovery, we’d have time for
our anaerobic system to recover and fire back up, as well as our phosphagen
system. While at the same time, especially if it was standing rest, our
oxygen consumption and heart rate would drop, meaning that we’d need to
spend the beginning of each repeat burning through our anaerobic system as
we waited for our aerobic system to fully kick in gear. So recovery length
manipulation not only matters in creating a stress to the system, but it also
determines what system is stressed.
With style adjustments, we change how the recovery is done. The
classic debate would be whether to stand or jog, but the reality is there are a
slew of speeds between jogging and very fast running, but still slower than
repeat pace. To start with the jogging versus standing question, the answer
depends once again on what adaptation we are seeking out. As I mentioned
--- PAGE 332 ---
above, if we jog, we keep heart rate, blood flow, and oxygen consumption
elevated. So it creates a situation where the aerobic system doesn’t go from
fully engaged to resting as quickly, therefore making each subsequent
interval more aerobic. Additionally, because of the increased circulation, the
body gets to work on clearance and removal of fatigue by-products during
the rest. While if we had standing rest, we’d create a situation where blood
would pool more, so and we’d accumulate more fatiguing products going
into the next interval. So this might be a better option when we are looking
at adapting to accumulation of fatigue or from a psychological standpoint if
we were looking at disrupting someone’s rhythm running ability.
We can take this a step further and look at making the speed of the
recovery more defined. Instead of specifying that an athlete simply jog, we
can look at faster speeds that may shift the emphasis to being able to
recover while still working fairly hard. For instance, if running repeat 800s
at 5k pace, we might include a 400m recovery at a steady pace that is just
slower than tempo pace. Now, during the recovery the body would have
built up fatigue during the repeat and be barely slower than our lactate
threshold. So, we’d be forcing our body to try to clear out the fatigue while
it is still working at a highly demanding aerobic speed. The fact is, for every
subsequent repeat we’d have ever increasing lactate levels being thrown
into the body, and we wouldn’t be able to clear things out very much on the
recovery, so we’d get used to dealing with ever increasing fatigue. On the
other hand, if we wanted to work on maximizing clearance, we might use a
pace that is around marathon pace, so it is slow enough that we aren’t at a
steady state yet but fast enough that the aerobic system is fully revved up.
The paces you can use are almost endless, from just slower to the repeat all
the way down to a “sprinter shuffle.”
Another way to change the style of the recovery is to add “stuff” to it.
This non-technical term called “stuff” refers to inserting various other
modalities, such as strength work, hills, sprints, or surges, into the recovery.
We could insert strength work such as squats, lunges, or squat jumps into
the recovery to work on strength endurance. The strength work would
provide some fatigue in a non-specific way, meaning that the exact same
muscle fibers aren’t recruited. Similarly, we could make the recovery on a
hilly loop or uphill to force an incomplete recovery and add a strength
component.
--- PAGE 333 ---
If instead we wanted to stress a different system, like the
neuromuscular system, during the recovery, we might add very short
sprints. This would force increased muscle fiber recruitment, and you would
then hope that those fibers were used and trained during the subsequent
repeat. Finally, if we needed to clear out some fatigue during the recovery
in hopes of having a faster next interval or to try to have an athlete salvage
the workout, we might include a short surge or a few strides at a moderate
aerobic pace.
“Stuff” can also be used in non-recovery situations too. An example
of this might be to insert plyometric-like activity in the middle of a repeat.
When working on kick development one of the goals is to increase fiber
recruitment during the kick. To accomplish this, one workout I like is to do
500m repeats, where the middle 100m is done by bounding. The bounding
is a way to increase the force component and thus recruit more muscle
fibers. In a similar vein, we could add surges during the middle of an easy
run to keep muscle tension high so that we don’t get into the habit of
slogging along. Or we could put surges in the middle of a repeat or at the
end of a long run to work on increasing the pace when fatigued or glycogen
depleted.
 
Terrain
Another way to manipulate a workout is by altering the terrain that it
is done on. The first thing that pops into your head should be running hills.
When we switch a workout to include hills, it increases the strength
component of the workout and slightly changes the muscle fiber
recruitment. The hill also dampens the amount of energy return a runner can
get off the ground, so it changes the dynamics of the run. How steep the hill
is determines the balance between strength/power and speed of the workout.
Obviously a gradual hill means that speed can still be kept relatively high,
that the mechanics of running are kept fairly normal, and that there are only
slight increases to the strength demands of the run. The opposite is true for
a very steep hill.
The desired adaptation determines what incline the hill should be. As
a general rule, the degree of incline can almost be thought of in terms of the
light weight versus heavy weight lifting paradigm. If we want to emphasize
--- PAGE 334 ---
pure strength, we lift heavy. If on the other hand we want speed and
explosiveness, we might lift a lower amount more quickly. And finally, if
we want to maximize power, there is a sweet spot between how heavy the
weight should be and how quickly we can move it. The same holds true for
hills.
The other way terrain manipulation comes into play is in the degree
of hardness, softness, and instability of the terrain itself. As I mentioned
previously, if we have a very soft, absorbent ground like sand or thick grass,
then we dampen how much energy return we can get from that ground. For
some runners this may not be a problem at all, while for others it may sap
all of their energy. This phenomenon can be seen in cross country where
you have your “grinder” runners who have heavy foot plants and tend to run
well on courses with rough terrain, and then you have your “bouncy” track
style runners who run poorly on rough terrain but excel on the perfectly
manicured and responsive golf course style courses. In training then we can
replicate some of these effects by running on a variety of surfaces. We can
choose hard surfaces for fast responsive running, or we can try to take it all
away by running on thick grass or slippery gravel. Similarly, we can use
sand or other surfaces occasionally to work on the stabilizers of the lower
leg, though this should be adapted to very gradually.
 
 
Volume, Density, and External Manipulators
The last two workout manipulators are changes in the volume and
density of the workout. While we have already looked at rep length
changes, increases in volume can be thought of in more global terms. If we
are able to handle a greater volume of work, given similar recovery and
speeds, then we’ve increased our work capacity. Or to put it another way,
we’ve increased the workload we can handle for a given stress load. An
increase in work capacity not only makes us stronger and better able to
absorb the work needed to reach the next level but also opens up the
possibility for handling new stressors.
When looking at the volume of work done in each workout or run, I
like to look at it in terms of how much total work we are doing for each
type of workout. We can think of things globally, as in how many total
--- PAGE 335 ---
meters or miles of specific endurance work can we do? So if we are training
for the 3k and do 6x800 at 3k pace, then we obviously do 3miles worth of
3k work. If we are looking to increase work capacity, the next time we
might do 7x800 for example. This is a simplistic demonstration, which
should come as no surprise, but if we look at the volume of each type of
workout it gives us an idea about where our work capacity strengths and
weaknesses lie and how we can change them.
If we have a middle distance athlete who can handle tons of 400’s at
mile pace without any problem but falls apart halfway through any longer
rep (i.e., mile repeats), then we might need to increase the volume on either
side of those mile repeats to try and give them the work capacity needed to
last. Increasing their threshold volume to 4 miles might help transfer some
of that strength to be able to do the longer repeats necessary to hit their
goal.
The other way to think of volume is within sets. Often times to bridge
the gap between an introductory workout and a full-fledged workout, it’s
smart to start with a workout split into sets and then gradually take away the
sets. In the example below, the total volume stays the same throughout, but
the volume broken into sets changes, thus the stress of the workout is
increased.
 
3 sets of (4x400 with 60sec rest) 3min rest between sets
2 sets of (6x400) with same rest
12x400 with 60-75sec rest
 
What changes in the above example is the density of the work.
Density is best conceptualized as how much work is packed into the
workout or the surroundings of the workout. It is essentially a combination
of work done and the time taken to do that work. So if we have more
activity jam packed into the entire workout, then the density is high. While
if it’s a relatively straightforward short and sweet workout, then density is
low. If we look at the 400m repeats example above, in terms of total volume
the workouts are exactly the same, but if we think of things psychologically,
performing 12 400m repeats straight through is a lot more challenging than
performing them with breaks. There is more work packed into the time
period.
--- PAGE 336 ---
But what happens if we inserted hill sprints or squat jumps during the
rest periods in between the sets? We’ve just increased the workload
significantly, so the density goes up, and it might be a denser workout now
than just doing 400’s straight through. Now, we’re doing consistent work
over the entire longer time frame. We have more time, but we also have
more work packed into that time, so the stress of that workout goes up. And
it’s not just the stress that matters. Why would we be concerned with
density or try to adapt athletes in that direction? Similar to volume, density
manipulations increase work capacity but also can be used to influence
strength endurance, and recoverability.
Up until now, we’ve thought of manipulating the workout in terms of
what goes on during that workout only. But what we do surrounding that
workout matters too. Density includes not only what happens within the
workout itself but also other activities within the training block. The
adaptations to a particular workout change if we are doing the workout in a
pre-fatigued state due to doing a workout the previous day or morning. So
we have to look at the density of the training block.
Imagine if we had a 17-mile long run on a Saturday morning. Would
the adaptations from that long run change if we had an easy 8 miles versus
if we had a 6 mile threshold on Friday afternoon before? You bet they
would. The reason is that now on that 17 mile run, we enter it in a pre-
fatigued state. We start the run with lower fuel stores, with some muscle
fibers having damage, and a whole host of other problems that we wouldn’t
have had with just an easy run the day before. What happens on the long
run now is that we delve deeper into our glycogen stores, we access
different muscle fibers, and we generally feel a bit more fatigued earlier. So
the adaptations we get from that long run change depending on what we did
the day before.
This same concept applies not only to workouts before long runs but
to the entire training program. We could do hill sprints the day before a
workout to change the neuromuscular demands or do some cruise 200’s the
morning before a hard repeat session or vice versa. What surrounds the
workouts matters. And without sounding too obsessively detail orientated,
what we do workout wise affects what we get out of our easy runs.
The surrounding density of the training can greatly affect the stress
and subsequent adaptations. It’s why you may be improving a ton even if
--- PAGE 337 ---
you can only do that 5xmile workout at the same speed as a month ago if
this time you did it in the middle of a 90mile week, as compared to 70, with
hill sprints the day before. Therefore density within a training block is a
great way to manipulate the demands of a workout without even having to
touch the workout itself!
Which brings me to external manipulators. These are similar to
density manipulators in that they may create a situation of pre-fatigue.
Instead of doing them by increasing the density of the training, they are
achieved by external means. One such way is to manipulate the recovery
after a workout or run. Instead of fully recovering, we may use minimal
recovery devices so that we create the pre-fatigue state discussed above. In
fact, during the base and pre-competition phases of training, recovery is de-
emphasized for this exact reason.
Another way to externally manipulate workouts is by using nutrition.
When training for the marathon, we generally think of taking carbs during a
long run as performance enhancing. But what if the adaptation we are trying
to achieve is to work on fuel use efficiency and sparing glycogen. If that’s
the case, then we want to shift fuel metabolism, and the way to do this is to
“embarrass” the system. So we need to delve deeper into the depths of
glycogen depletion. To do this, we could do fasted runs where we wake up
and don’t fuel before a run so that we use our overnight fast as a way to
train with less glycogen. Similarly, we may do really long runs without
fueling support to push the stress of low glycogen further. It’s a balancing
act to determine when to do this and when to practice the race strategy of
fueling, but the point is that we can use nutrition to manipulate the stressor
of the workout.
 
Feedback Manipulators
Times, splits, seconds, minutes. They are so ingrained in our head as
runners, sometime cruelly, that we cannot escape them. We become slaves
to the watch and knowing exactly where we are during every workout and
every race. But what happens if we take it all away?
The role of feedback in performance is an intriguing one. Current
theories on fatigue posit that it is a combination of internal and external
feedback that tells us how we feel at that moment during a race. We then
--- PAGE 338 ---
use that momentary fatigue to compare with how we think we should feel at
that moment, knowing that we have X amount left, and that determines if
we drive on or slow down. There’s more to it, and usually we focus on the
internal feedback (lactate levels, glycogen stores, etc.) that we aren’t
exactly aware of but that we know our brain is constantly monitoring. We
forget that the external feedback plays just as big of a role. So, the splits
you hear, the people you are passing or getting passed by, the mile marker
coming up; it all matters.
In training we give athletes set numbers of intervals at set paces with
set rest breaks. They know exactly how fast they have to run for, when they
are going to stop, how much rest, etc. In a race, you know the distance, but
the pace could go all sorts of different ways. It could be tactical; you could
have some crazy person go out hard, do a crazy surge, and so on. The
athlete isn’t in control, so we have to train the mental aspect during
practice. We have to train them to deal with unknown external
feedback, especially in championship style racing. How do we do this?
One way we can create psychological stress that in turn changes into
physiological stress and adaptation is by manipulating the feedback that a
runner receive in practice. We can manipulate the runner’s knowledge of
splits, rep length, recovery, or even the total workout. I call these blind
feedback workouts, where we take away some form of external feedback
depending on the desired adaptation.
We can further classify these into blind surges, blind distance, and
blind splits workouts. During Blind surges, we try to replicate the
uncertainty of a race where when surges occur the athlete has to decide to
surge or not without knowing how long that surge might last. We are trying
to work on acclimatizing the “central governor” of the runner to unknown
outcomes and convincing the brain it’s okay if we surge without knowing
for how long it will last. Blind surge workouts can be done in multiple
ways. First, if you are running with your athletes, you can surge at different
intervals within a run or workout, with their only instructions to go with
you no matter what and without telling them how far you will surge for.
Another way is to simply blow a whistle whenever you want an athlete to
surge and tell them to surge until you blow the whistle again. I often
prescribe these during tempo or longer repeats.
--- PAGE 339 ---
During blind distance workouts, I prescribe an athlete a pace to run
without instructing them on how far they will run that rep. By doing a
workout in this style, we work on an athlete having that creeping
uncertainty and anxiety that comes from not knowing how far they’ll go. It
really works on the mental strength of the athlete and helps them with
working through tough patches of a race.
Finally, we have blind split workouts where we inform the athlete of
the rep distance but withhold split information. The goal is to ingrain the
ability to focus on how they feel and the rhythm of running. Oftentimes,
this works well with athletes who hold themselves back by only rarely
going outside of their own perceived ability level. By taking away the
reliance on splits we allow for breakthroughs to occur. The famed coach
Mihali Igloi was a proponent of using such workouts as he gave his athletes
descriptors of how they should feel during each repeat, instead of using
time goals.
 
Breaking Away
Once you break free from the constraints of thinking 400’s equals
anaerobic training, you can quickly see that how the workout is
manipulated and created determines the stimulus and ultimately the
adaptation. We can do 400’s that range from completely anaerobic capacity
work to simply a general aerobic stimulus and everything in between. This
happens solely based on how we manipulate every single variable.
We have all of these different variables to tweak, and the training
stimuli provided depends on the combination of all of them. The point isn’t
to overly complicate workout design but instead to change the paradigm.
Instead of seeing workouts as a classification scheme where we do X
workout in Y zone, we see workouts as a way to increase stress and drive
adaptation. The way that stress is increased determines the direction of the
adaptation the body takes. Therefore, it’s a simple act of stress that leads to
an adaptation. It’s just up to you as the coach to paint the picture and take
the adaptation the route you want it to go. It’s about making the right
decisions to continue adaptation in the correct directions for the goals of the
athlete. Hopefully, you can see that it’s not a tedious way to complicate
training but instead a liberating simple idea that allows for freedom of
--- PAGE 340 ---
creating and molding the athletes’ physiology and psychology in the way
necessary for them to reach their limits in running.
--- PAGE 341 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 343 ---
17

--- PAGE 344 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 345 ---
Individualizing Training
“When we categorize, we polarize.” Leonard Mlodinow
 
Individualization is one of those buzzwords or so called principles of
training that coaches frequently talk about. But what does this actually
mean and do people actually adhere to this so called training law? You’ll
find that most people claim to adhere to it, but few actually do. It is very
rare that a coach can completely adapt to the individual. Instead, most
coaches try to adapt the individual to their training system, instead of
adapting the training system to the individual. While this might seem like a
difference in semantics, it is actually much more.
When most coaches think of individualization, they do the former
and try to adapt their athlete to the training program. By this I mean that
they have their own training model or system and they try to force the
athlete into this model. For example, if someone was using a strict Lydiard
system, he would try to get the athlete up to 100mpw, then follow it with
hills, and so forth. The coach’s idea of individualizing this program for the
athlete would be to adjust the quantity or quality of the training, but the
overall system would be the same. By doing this, the coach thinks he is
adapting to the individual. However, all he is really doing is taking that
same training model and putting the athlete in it.
Another form of individualization used by coaches is to adapt their
training program based on the event the athlete runs. In doing this, coaches
change their training system slightly based on the different track events.
The athletes are put into groups based on the type of runner they are. If
they are a 1500m runner, then their training would differ slightly from if
they were a 5,000m runner. One such system, based on Frank Horwill’s
work, would use the 2 distances above and below the race distance as the
main training paces. A 1500m runner would therefore train at race pace in
addition to 400m, 800m, 5000m and 10km pace,  while a 5000m runner
would get rid of 400m pace and add half marathon pace. The problem with
this type of individualization is that it assumes that every runner running a
particular event is the same. So the coach is not adapting to the individual;
instead he is adapting to an event.
--- PAGE 346 ---
These two commonly used methods of “individualization” suffer
from the same problem; they are trying to fit the individual into the system
or event. The key to true individualization is creating the training system
around the individual runner’s needs. In the chapter Theories of Training
Adaptation, the scientific basis for the individuality of adaptation was
discussed. We saw that recent research shows a wide range of adaptation
responses to the same exact training stimulus. This should not come as a
surprise, as in just looking at what affects adaptation it is clear that an
individual’s physiological makeup can significantly affect their response to
a workout. Despite this fact, it is seldom acknowledged in either the
coaching or research world. Scientists doing training studies continually
look at the group as a whole and search for some mythic magical training
intensity. Obviously accounting for every individual difference between
people is impossible, but in this chapter, a practical model of true
individualization will be introduced, and readers will learn how to apply
this to their own training.
True individualization requires adaptation of the training system to
the athlete. This means that the training system changes, sometimes
entirely, based on the individual physiology of an athlete. If we look at
physiology, it can be seen that individuals vary widely in a number of
different aspects. Some of those aspects we are well aware of, such as the
percentage of different muscle fibers an athlete has. Other aspects are
probably unknown to us, such as some genetic limits or the total amount
of adaptation energy a person has. Acknowledging that we do not have the
whole picture figured out, it is important to make individual adaptations in
our training based on the parameters that we do know.
Looking at it from a coaching perspective, I’m sure we have all had
several runners who run around the same time for a distance, let’s say the
mile for example, yet some of those excel to a higher degree at faster
races, while others excel at longer races. In essence, to reach the same
mile time, some of the runners come at it from the speed side, while others
come at it from the endurance side, and some seem to have a perfect mix
at the mile. Do these runners all need the same exact training since they
are running the same kinds of times for the same event? No.
In looking at the training done by different runners, the idea that
different athletes need different training becomes clear. If we just look at
--- PAGE 347 ---
one event, say the 1500m, we can see that we’ve had World Record
holders and Olympic medalist succeed off of a wide range of training
programs. Some used very high mileage, some used very low mileage.
Others used endless repeats with lots of anaerobic training, while others
were strength based. Peter Snell was a world record holder and gold
medalist at 800m and 1500m using a Lydiard, high mileage approach.
Lydiard is famous for saying that Snell won the 800m when he had the
slowest 200m speed of anyone in the field. So that must be the right
approach? On the other hand, Sebastian Coe succeeded with a program
that included much lower mileage and much higher intensity interval
workouts. He achieved similar success to Snell and did it more recently, so
that must be the magic program? Nope. How can so many seemingly
different programs produce great results for the same event? It’s because
the program worked for that individual. It may not have worked for
another equally talented but different runner. Even the greatest training
system will not work for every runner.
Snell succeeded off the Lydiard program probably for the very
reason that Lydiard always used as proof his system worked: that Snell
had the slowest speed. He needed the long aerobic training and came at
the 800m from the endurance side. Coe on the other hand split mid 45’s on
4x400m and was brought up slowly adjusting to higher and higher
intensity training, so it makes sense that his approach worked for him.
One last example is that of Jim Ryun. He achieved phenomenal times in
the 800m, 1500m, and mile, yet there were scores of talented athletes who
went to Kansas University who tried to copy Ryun’s training and had little
success. The reason? Bob Timmons system was well suited to Ryun who
could handle large workloads, but other runners weren’t physiological or
psychologically the same as Ryun, so it did not suit them.
The best coach should be able to use a wide range of systems. They
should be able to use a high mileage approach when that is needed and a
low mileage/high intensity approach when that is needed. In essence, the
best coach has no distinct system; he has general principles of training but
is not locked into calling himself a “high mileage” coach for example.
Instead, the best coach adapts to the individual giving him exactly what he
needs. As it currently stands, most coaches are locked into one idea, and
the runner has to get lucky and hope that he is physiological compatible
--- PAGE 348 ---
with that system, because if he’s not, good luck. While this may sound like
a daunting task, how do we break away from having one dogmatic
training system?
The answer is using a practical model for individualization.
Combining observation of athletes training with the science gives us a
simple model. Although good coaches have been practically
individualizing training for years, the first integrated system of
individualized training I came across was by Jan Olbrecht in The Science
of Winning. Later, Italian coach Renato Canova developed a similar
integrated model. Using those two models as a foundation and building
upon it with both practical experience and science, a system of
individualizing training based on muscle fiber type is described below.
Am I saying that every runner needs to go get a muscle biopsy and figure
out his or her muscle fiber type? No. Using muscle fiber type provides for
an easily understandable model, especially when we combine it with the
runner’s goal event.
 
Muscle Fiber Type
Before delving into how to individualize based on muscle fiber type,
let’s briefly go over some important basics about muscle fibers. Fiber
types are generally classified as Slow Twitch (ST) or Fast Twitch (FT)
with several subdivisions of FT fiber types (FT-a,x,c are common
classifications). The details of how these are classified are not important
for the coach, so we’ll skip this. While having distinct fiber type
classifications is useful in research, the reality is that fiber types are more
like a spectrum. On one side of the spectrum we have what we’d call a
pure ST fiber and on the opposite is the pure FT fiber. In between these
two extremes is a range of fibers with different ratios of FT/ST
characteristics, and this is where the majority of fibers fall. Where exactly
a fiber falls depends on its individual characteristics, which are things like
mitochondria density, capillary density, oxidative and Glycolytic enzyme
activity, creatine phosphate stores, and contraction velocity.
--- PAGE 349 ---
Along this continuum, fiber type can shift to either the aerobic (ST)
or anaerobic (FT) side. With acute training, the shifts are very small, but
with long term training a larger change can occur. How large a change is
up for debate. Switching back to the science for a minute, for a long time
Scientists thought that we could not change fiber types at all, then it
became we can’t switch fiber types from FT to ST. The reality is that we
most likely can change fiber types; the reason why it can’t be proven in
humans is that it is a long process. Several pieces of evidence lead to this
conclusion. First, animal studies on both rats and rabbits have
demonstrated complete fiber type changes with chronic muscle
stimulation. What they’ve found is that a large amount of damage is
required for a complete transformation. Second, fiber type percentages
have been altered in elite skiers as shown when they were tested during
their beginning stages of training and then 7 years later. Put these two
together, and it makes sense that a large amount of volume (or in other
words, damage) is needed to change fiber types.
The second piece of important practical information regarding
muscle fibers is how recruitment occurs. First, muscle recruitment is
dependent not on speed or intensity, although they are related, but on force
output required. The amount of force needed determines muscle
activation. This explains why running slightly slower up a hill activates
more muscle than running on the flat ground at a slightly faster pace. The
easier to recruit fibers (ST) take up the work first, while the harder to
recruit fibers are activated as force or duration increases. But this isn’t
always the case. There are instances when FT fibers are recruited before
ST fibers, particularly in situations when a high amount of force is needed
in a short amount of time, such as ballistics exercises or during sprinting.
Similarly, the force rule of muscle fiber recruitment can be violated during
--- PAGE 350 ---
prolonged activity when ST fibers fatigue (glycogen is depleted for
example), and then the FT fibers are recruited to take up the slack, despite
the relatively low intensity and force recruitment.
Muscle fiber, or more properly termed Motor Unit, recruitment for
endurance events happens in a cyclical manner. That means within a
whole muscle, some units are recruited to do the work and then they can
cycle off and recover, while other units cycle on and take up the workload.
At low intensities, the number of units active at the same time is very low,
but as intensity increases more units need to be active at the same time to
result in a great enough force output, thus fewer units are recovering or
inactive. Additionally, as force recruitment increases the “resting” time
between both activation and between individual contractions decreases.
These concepts about muscle fibers and recruitment are important in
obtaining a complete understanding of the next section, which is on how
to individualize training.
 
The Slow Twitch vs. Fast Twitch
Model
First, let’s look at why we use fiber type and event for the model.
Many coaches individualize based on event, but as mentioned earlier that
assumes that every person who runs the same event is the same. That is
simply not true. Still, it is a good idea to use event run to individualize
because each event presents a different physiological demand. An 800m is
going to require a completely different skill set then a 5k for instance. But
there is something missing; something is needed that can distinguish the
differences between runners who all run the same event. We need a
simple, easily understandable parameter to explain those differences, and
that parameter is muscle fiber type.
We are not using muscle fiber type in the strict scientific sense, but
as a means of helping to separate runners. Each athlete will fall
somewhere on the fiber type spectrum for this model. Finding out exactly
where they fall is unnecessary but having a general idea of where your
runner is on the spectrum will provide the basis for how to individualize.
An easy way to figure out where each runner falls will be discussed
--- PAGE 351 ---
shortly. General guidelines for each type are listed in the chart below and
on the following page:
:
The charts provide a general overview of the differences between a
FT and a ST runner and some of the general training recommendations
--- PAGE 352 ---
based on these differences. The reasons for the different needs are mainly
due to 3 main factors:
 
1. The difference in anaerobic and aerobic capacities. (i.e., Energy
system contribution)
2. The difference in muscle fiber recruitment.
3. The strength of their fuel systems.
 
A FT runner will have a higher anaerobic capacity and a lower
aerobic capacity. That means at slower speeds, our FT runner will need to
supplement his aerobic energy production with some more anaerobic
production. At each intensity, the FT runner will need the anaerobic
system to pick up the slack for his poorer aerobic system. It is okay to an
extent as this runner has a very large anaerobic system that can handle the
increased workload to a large degree. On the other hand, the ST runner
will rely heavily on the aerobic system and will not delve into using his
anaerobic capacity until much higher intensities, and that anaerobic
capacity will not last as long.
The second difference is in muscle fiber recruitment. At any given
intensity, a FT runner will be recruiting more FT fibers than a ST runner.
More FT fibers recruited means more use of the anaerobic energy
pathways, more lactate production and less lactate clearance.
Lastly, the strength of the fuel systems will be different. A ST runner
will be more effective at using fat as a fuel source and have a greater
glycogen supply. That means, ST runners can handle longer runs and more
mileage without completely depleting glycogen stores. It will also play a
role in the speed of recovery or easy runs. A FT runner would burn more
carbohydrate, thus depleting glycogen stores more than a ST runner at the
same speed. This means that if the goal is to make sure recovery takes
place, a slower speed will be needed for the FT runner.
 
How Fiber Type Impacts Each Training
Workout
Before discussing the exact changes that need to be made for each
type of runner, let’s consider what sort of training modifications does fiber
--- PAGE 353 ---
type require? Remember that workouts are designed for eliciting a specific
adaptation. A simple example is that a long run is used to increase general
endurance and enhance your ability to use fat as a fuel source. Where fiber
type comes in is not in what the goal adaptation is, but what workouts are
used to reach that goal adaptation. In the following paragraphs we’ll look
at some of our goal adaptations and how fiber type impacts what we do to
reach those adaptations.
 
Long Run
The long run has become a sacred part of the runner’s training
schedule. Once a week, the runner religiously gets in a run that is the
longest of the week. The goal of the long run varies based on what event
you are training for, but its main goals are to build general endurance,
change the fuel system, and get the musculoskeletal system prepared for
all that pounding. While most runners need a long run, care needs to be
taken in assigning the specifics of the run. A ST runner can handle a
longer long run, a faster paced run, and more “stuff” added into the run.
We don’t want a FT runner running for too long or too fast for several
reasons. First, FT fibers will start to get recruited after a prolonged period
of time, thus training them more aerobically, which could be
counterproductive for a FT runner. Second, because of their more
inefficient fuel system, glycogen depletion will occur sooner, thus if a run
is too long or too fast glycogen depletion will be significant and impact
their subsequent training. The bottom line is too long or fast of a long run
will negatively impact their anaerobic abilities to a large degree, which is
what a FT athlete thrives off of.
 
High End Aerobic Endurance
Working down the aerobic ladder, the next training goal is usually
something I refer to as high end aerobic endurance. This definition works
well when discussing multiple events and is best thought of as improving
steady endurance, such as lactate threshold, marathon pace, or similar
intensities. Traditionally, workouts such as threshold runs, tempos, or
progression runs have been used. However, the ways to develop high end
aerobic endurance for ST and FT runners differs markedly. Running at or
--- PAGE 354 ---
below the Lactate Threshold is the most commonly used workout, and it
works extremely well for ST runners, but for FT runners too much
running at the LT will decrease the runner’s anaerobic capacity, which is
vital to their success, and decrease their muscle tension which will leave
their muscles feeling flat and non-responsive. For these reasons, FT
runners should do a minimal amount of LT work and instead focus on
broken tempos at 5-10sec per mile faster than threshold and on longer
straight tempos at 15-30sec slower than threshold. In addition, progression
runs work well for FT runners. Lastly, short surges or short intervals at 3k-
10k speeds with short rests train the high end endurance of FT runners
because it trains their FT fibers aerobically. In addition, for shorter event
groups, it allows for training aerobically at speeds that are more specific.
On the other hand, ST runners thrive off of lots of work ranging
from long steady runs at marathon pace to runs done at around threshold.
Instead of full workouts at just faster than threshold, ST runners benefit
from finishing off threshold runs with 5-10 minutes at a slightly faster
pace. Finally, ST athletes benefit greatly from the inclusion of
alternations. These workouts alternate running at 10k to threshold type
paces with their “recovery” being running at a still steady pace that
usually is at marathon pace or just slower. An example would be
alternating 800m at threshold and 800m at marathon pace for 6 miles.
 
Alternations
FT runners do alternation work too, but how it is done differs. ST
runners typically use alternations to build endurance at 5k pace or slower
speeds, and their recovery portion is done at a moderate but still pretty fast
pace. In addition, ST runners aim to build the alternations to include
running longer segments of up to 1 mile or more. On the other hand, FT
runner’s alternation workouts differ in several key ways. First, the pace of
the “recovery” portion of the alternation is drastically slower. Second, the
total volume of work is lower, and often the alternations are split into sets
instead of one long continuous session. Third, their alternation workouts
include running at faster speeds up to 800m pace or faster for the hard
segment. Fourth, the lengths of the segments are drastically shorter. For
example, a FT 800m runner might do an alternation workout that includes
--- PAGE 355 ---
alternating 100m at 800m pace and 100m slow for a mile, take a break and
repeat. On the other hand a ST 5,000m runner might alternate 800m at 10k
pace with 800m at marathon pace for 5 miles straight.
 
Speed Endurance/Anaerobic
A key difference in the types of runners is how much intensive
speed work that they can handle. For simplicity’s sake, we’ll call this
work “anaerobic”. ST runners generally only need a small to moderate
amount of anaerobic work to maximize their potential. Typically, when ST
runners do a large amount of anaerobic work, their aerobic abilities
degrade and suffer. The key is doing enough to maximize performance
while still maintaining aerobic abilities. There are several possible
solutions to this balancing act. The Lydiard way was to do a short period
of anaerobic type work at the end of the season. While this works, it is
risky and can often lead to a mistimed peak or a short peaking period. The
second option is to include short cycles of anaerobic work followed by
aerobic refresh periods to balance each other out. Another option is to do
small spices of anaerobic work throughout the year without ever having a
period heavily emphasizing it. Along the same lines, including small
amounts of anaerobic work tacked onto the end of other types of workouts
is another option. I generally prefer the latter two options and opt for
small anaerobic workouts that do not tear the athlete down; in essence, a
lot of mini workouts are performed. For example, 8x200 with 200 jog,
starting at mile pace, and doing the workout periodically until you
progress to faster than 800 pace works well. The volume is low enough
that it does not seem to impair the aerobic system.
On the other hand, FT runners can handle more anaerobic work and
need a longer buildup of this type of work. They can handle more intense
workouts more frequently. For the workout specifically, longer rest
periods are needed for FT runners. 
 
Speed
Pure Speed refers to short intense sprints generally of a 100m or less
and is something that both types of runners need. The FT runner needs it
to maintain that stimulus on the harder to recruit Fast Twitch fibers, while
--- PAGE 356 ---
a ST runner needs to work on this weakness to increase his recruitable
fiber pool and neuromuscular system. The differences are in how much of
this they can handle and the recovery periods between them. Let’s split the
pure sprint work between that done on a moderate hill and that done on
the track. Both types of runners should do both kinds of sprints, but hill
sprints are usually easier to recover from. ST runners should rely more on
hill sprints with some occasional flat track sprints because they are
looking more for the fiber recruitment benefits. FT runners should do a
higher percentage of their sprint work on the flat ground as they are
looking more at rate of force development and elastic energy use
development. Additionally, FT runners should be given a longer recovery
period between sprints as it takes them longer to replenish their
phosphagen system than ST runners.
 
Specific Endurance Development
The development of specific endurance is another factor that
depends on the runner’s physiology. While specific endurance is also
event specific, there are some general guidelines for how development
differs with each group. FT runner’s benefit mostly from coming at it from
a short to long approach. That means that they start out with short
segments that are at race pace and gradually extend the length of those
repeats while keeping the pace relatively the same. ST runners on the
other hand benefit more from a top down approach where they
progressively increase the pace of their repeats until it reaches goal pace
and then the recovery between repeats is shortened. While both types of
athletes need both approaches, the fiber type classification will determine
what approach receives more emphasis.
Another difference is in the volume of the workout. ST runners can
generally handle more volume in total and in the set. FT runners’ workouts
should often be broken into sets with long rest periods between sets to
allow for increased total workload. Alternations can be used for specific
endurance development too, and the differences noted above apply here as
well. ST runners should work at decreasing the difference in pace between
their specific pace segment and their recovery segment, while FT runners
should focus on hitting their specific pace segment, keeping the recovery
--- PAGE 357 ---
very moderate, and increasing the length of their specific segment. Lastly,
both types of runners benefit from mixed workouts, or what I call blend
workouts, that mix paces during the workouts to develop specific
endurance. FT runners benefit more from blends that include a wide range
of paces, while ST runners benefit from blend workouts for specific
endurance development that focus on a tightly grouped range of
intensities.
 
Completing the Model
Lastly the total mileage and pace of recovery runs should differ
between the two types of runners. FT runners need lower mileage than
their counterparts because the higher mileage will dampen their anaerobic
abilities and because they will have a harder time recovering because they
do not have as developed a fuel system, thus glycogen depletion occurs
quicker. On recovery runs, the FT runner is better served by doing short
recovery runs, possibly even splitting the day’s mileage into two short
recovery runs. In addition, the pace should be kept lighter than the ST
athletes. ST runners can run at a faster pace using primarily fat as fuel, so
they can run their recovery runs at faster speeds without negatively
effecting glycogen recovery for example.
But what really makes the model work is finding out where the
runner falls in relation to the event they are racing. Basically, you are
looking at how his speed and endurance compare to other runners racing
the event. We can then classify the runner as being a FT orientated runner
or ST orientated runner for that particular event. Once classified as a FT or
ST orientated runner for that event, individualization can fully take place.
Why is event group needed? Because an athlete who should be trained
from the ST side for an 800m may need to be trained from the FT side if
he decided to move up to a 3k or 5k. Or to put it differently, his endurance
may be a strength at 800m, but it is not adequate, or it is a weakness, at
5,000m.
The goals for the athletes are the same; just how we accomplish
them changes. Use the principles of what the differences between FT and
ST runners are above and apply them to training athletes in specific event
groups. This is the last refining step in the individualization process.
--- PAGE 358 ---
Listed in the charts below are examples and guidelines for each
event group. As explained previously, General refers to work that is far
away from the goal race, support refers to work that connects general and
specific work, and specific refers to any work done at around race speed.
Furthermore, it can either come from the speed side or endurance side,
which is noted on the left side of the chart:
800m
1500m
--- PAGE 359 ---
 
5,000m, 10,000m and Cross Country
--- PAGE 360 ---
Finding Your Fiber Type
Short of getting a muscle biopsy, which is very painful and invasive,
there is no true way to find fiber type. And even if we did, it would truly
vary from muscle to muscle. Thankfully, there are several simple tests that
allow for an estimation of where you fall on the fiber type spectrum. By
using the following tests, you’ll be able to identify what kind of runner
you are and begin the process of individualization.
 
Lactate Test
To start, let’s look at the most invasive and expensive of the group, a
lactate test. While a lactate test might sound like something reserved for
--- PAGE 361 ---
only exercise scientists, a quality portable lactate analyzer can be
purchased for a couple hundred dollars, or there are numerous
performance testing businesses popping up which will provide lactate
testing for around $50. The key is knowing how to test.
In determining what type of runner you are, a simple test can be
used that Jan Olbrecht calls the anaerobic capacity test. In this test, you
run between 400 and 600m all out. Following the test, lactate samples are
taken starting at 3 minutes and every 2 minutes afterwards.  The objective
is to get a clear maximum lactate reading. There is a delay in lactate
production in the muscles and accumulation in the blood, especially after
a short test, so a max usually this occurs between 5 and 9 minutes, but you
should continue to take lactate samples until a drop in lactate readings is
seen. Once the maximum lactate is obtained, this can be used to ascertain
where you fall on the fiber type spectrum. The lower the lactate levels, the
more ST, while the opposite is true for FT. As a guideline a reading of 6 or
less and you are about as ST as you can get. Between 6 and 9 and you are
predominately ST. Anything between 10 and 14 and you have a mixture.
Between 14 and 18 and you are more likely to be in the FT group, and
anything above around 19 and you are definitely in the FT group.
Combine this info with how fast the distance was completed, and a good
picture develops of how the runner should be classified.
 
PR Comparison
A much simpler method is to compare the best times of a runner at
distances above and below their primary event. This method relies on two
things, first that the runner has had equal opportunities in racing events
above and below his event and second, that a valid method of comparison
is used. These two factors introduce some room for error so it is a less
accurate approach.
There are many different methods used for PR comparison. Some of
the more accepted methods include the IAAF performance tables which
can be found on their website (IAAF.org), and two equivalency
mathematical models. The first of the mathematical models is the Purdy
calculator, which can be found through an Internet search, and the
McMillan calculator, which can be found on mcmillanrunning.com. These
--- PAGE 362 ---
systems are generally acceptable when comparing events 800m and up but
are less accurate for distances below that. Use the athlete’s primary event
and compare his above and below distance PR’s versus those that are
calculated by the above methods. If his longer events are closer to, or even
surpass, the predictions by more than his shorter events, then the athlete is
a ST athlete for that event. The opposite is true if the shorter events are
comparably better.
 
Performance Testing
There are several performance tests that can be done to determine
what type of an athlete a runner is. The easiest is a simple sprint test over
100m, which will give an indication of an athlete’s pure sprint speed.
Since sprint speed is highly related to fiber type, the faster the 100m time,
the more FT fibers the runner is likely to have.
Other tests that can be performed include power tests. Power tests
give a strong indication of what fiber type grouping a runner belongs to
because power is dependent on rate of force development. Rate of force
development is highly related to fiber type, as FT fibers are able to
produce large amounts of force more quickly than ST. Some power tests
include a standing broad jump test and the 25-meter hopping test. The
standing broad jump is self-explanatory and consists of seeing the furthest
a person can long jump from a stationary position. While there is no set
standardization of what is a good distance for distance runners, FT runners
will be able to jump further. The 25 meter hopping test consists of hopping
on one leg for 25 meters with the goal being to get past 25 meters in the
fewest hops possible. The British Miler’s Club developed this
standardized test over 25 years ago and found that for world class 800m
runners males needed to be able to cover 25m in 10 hops or less and
females in 11.
 
Stride Mechanics
An often overlooked but very useful tool in individualizing a
runner’s training is in looking at their stride characteristics. Runners tend
to develop a wide variety of running styles. While there is certainly a
--- PAGE 363 ---
better way to run biomechanically, an individual’s running form can
provide us some clues as to what type of runner they are.
To start with, one of the major differences is in ground contact time.
A FT runner will typically have a shorter ground contact time than a ST
runner for the simple reason that they are able to generate force more
quickly. Ground contact can be measured in any gait analysis lab, but
since the focus of this section is on practical tests, by using a high speed
camera you too can measure ground contact times. High speed cameras
allow for filming at very high frame rates, or in laymen’s times it allows
for super slow motion video. While these cameras have been traditionally
expensive, the Casio Exilim series has cameras as low as $130 that can
shoot up to 1,000 frames per second.
To measure ground contact time simply have someone record foot
strike using the high speed function. You can count frames from the time
foot contact occurred to the time the foot leaves the ground, and then by
using a little math convert the frame numbers to a time in seconds.
Alternatively, use free motion analysis software to do this work for you.
On my website, I explain in detail what program to use and how to use it,
which can be found by searching for the post ”Poor man’s High Speed
Video Analysis.” Since ground contact times change with speed, do the
analysis at the same relative speed for each runner. While there are no set
ground contact time guidelines, research provides us some guidance for
800m and 1500m runners. In a series of studies by Hayes and Caplan,
ground contact times were measured in 1500m races (average time 3:56)
and 800m races (average time 1:55). In the 1500m, forefoot strikers
ground contact time averaged .161sec, mid-foot strikers .169sec, and heel
strikers .192sec. In the 800m, forefoot strikers averaged .156sec, mid-foot
strikers .161sec, and heel strikers .177sec. These values can be used as
references to compare your runners to.
Ground contact time is not the only characteristic that matters. How
well a runner uses elastic energy also plays a role in individualizing their
training. A runner with a bouncier, more elastic stride is typically a FT
runner for his event, while a ‘grinder’ who has a flatter stride that people
associate with ‘strength’ runners is typically a ST runner for his event.
While there is no exact test to determine each type of runner, there are
several things to look for. First is foot strike, an elastic runner tends to
--- PAGE 364 ---
land higher up on their forefoot. Second is how the stride looks, an elastic
runner will have more spring or bounce in their stride. In addition, they
will use their Achilles tendon to a larger degree to provide for elastic
energy. Lastly, compare how the runner tends to perform on hard surfaces,
such as a track, versus soft surfaces, such as the grass. An elastic runner
tends to perform much better on hard surfaces than soft due to his reliance
on elastic energy.
Use any of these tests or a combination of them to help discern what
type of runner you or your athletes are. While it is not an exact science,
using several of these tests will allow for an accurate judgment of where a
runner falls on the fiber type spectrum. This information combined with
their event specialty can then be used to individualize their training.
 
--- PAGE 365 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 367 ---
18

--- PAGE 368 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 369 ---
Defining the Workouts
“The person who acquires more knowledge often develops an
enhanced illusion of her skill and becomes unrealistically overconfident.”
Daniel Kahneman
 
Since the type of runner and the event that they are training for
changes the particular workouts effects, there is no easy way to run down
each type of workout for each specific purpose. Throughout the training
section the emphasis has been on de-classifying workouts and getting your
brain out of the habit of creating zones. Now, we reach the difficult part of
having to discuss the variety of workouts available. In this chapter, what
we are attempting to define is a variety of different ways to do workouts.
The aim is to divide workouts into the ways they are traditionally used,
such as distance runs, long runs, intervals, or tempo runs, and then discuss
the variety of ways to do each workout and what effect each way will have
on an athlete physiologically. I am not saying that we should do only
Tempo runs to improve aerobic abilities. Instead, think of this as your
toolbox. We have all of these ways to do a particular workout and
manipulate it. Once this is done, we’ll go through each event, from 800m
to the marathon, and define how to progress from general to support to
specific training.
 
Mileage and Recovery Running
Runners are obsessed with mileage due to the fact that it is easily
measured and provides a way to quantify training. While it is a useful tool,
it should not be a goal in and of itself. Instead the individual runs and
workouts should be planned to provide the most benefits, and the mileage
should be a result of those runs. That being said, mileage is still useful in
measuring total volume stress. The biggest question is how to increase
mileage. For various reasons, a so called 10% rule for increasing mileage
has developed as a sort of law of training. Throw it out. Just like in
adapting to interval training, weights, or any other stimulus, the
individuality of what a runner can handle varies a lot. Some runners will
be able to handle massive increases, while others need small increases.
--- PAGE 370 ---
The 10% rule essentially assumes that we are all the same and at the same
point in our training.
To aid you in this process of figuring out how to increase mileage,
there are a few simple rules that can be followed. First, it is safe to
increase mileage very rapidly to any level which you have been previously
consistent at over the past 6-12 months. For example, if during the
previous training cycle I maxed out at 100mpw during the base phase,
then dropped gradually to 70mpw during the end of the season, and then
took 2 weeks off, when I started back up I could rapidly increase up to 80-
90mpw (because that’s what I was most likely consistent at during the
base phase). How rapidly depends on the person, but it is not unusual to
be able to go from 2 weeks off of running post season to 50, 70, and then
85mpw in a 3 week period. When you should be more cautious about
increasing mileage is when venturing into new territory. That is when slow
and gradual adaptation occurs. As a general rule, when delving into new
levels of mileage, add one mile per day of running to the schedule. Some
will be able to handle a slightly more aggressive approach. The injury
history, biomechanics, structural build, and nutrition (such as calcium
levels) of the runner help determine how quickly they can increase
mileage. With the topic of total mileage touched on, what makes up all of
those miles?
Research and practical experience has demonstrated that with elite
runners 70-80% of their training volume is either General or Recovery
paced training. In Kenyan runner Moses Mosop’s lead up to his Kenyan
Cross Country Championship during the 4 months prior to his win, he
averaged ~54% of his training done at recovery paces or slower and 27%
of his training in the General category. Combined this resulted in 81% of
his training being performed at General speeds or slower; in other words,
over 80% of his training was performed at steady paces or slower. Lower
caliber runners may be able to handle a higher percentage of their training
to be done at more intense speeds due to their lower training volumes.
With 80% of their training devoted to such low intensity running, let’s first
look at the various types of runs that fall into this category.
 
Normal Distance Runs
--- PAGE 371 ---
A normal distance run is just what it sounds like; it is a typical
distance run and represents the most basic form of training. For almost
every event, your typical distance run can be considered general training.
The benefits of distance runs are almost entirely focused on aerobic
adaptations, whether it is changes in capillarization, mitochondria, aerobic
enzymes, or cardiorespiratory adaptations. In addition, distance runs can
help to improve the fuel system, including changes in substrate use and
glycogen storage. In a practical sense though, distance runs are necessarily
for accumulating a sufficient amount of mileage and to enhance the other
training. Many of the changes that occur with endurance training are the
result of long term consistent training and can take years for full
adaptation to occur, such as shifting muscle fiber types. Thus, the role of
distance is to establish the general aerobic endurance.
The pace of the distance runs depends on several factors including
the event your training for, what type of runner you are, and the purpose
of the run. Before it is considered a true workout, distance runs can
generally be run at speeds up to around 5% slower than marathon pace. As
described previously, steady running is generally 5-10% slower than
marathon pace, and easy running is up to around 25% slower than
marathon pace. To keep it simple though, easy is a pace that could be run
at without even concentrating. Breathing should be very easy, and a
conversation should be possible. At steady pace it is still relatively easy,
but some concentration is required. In other words, a small degree of
effort is required to run at a steady pace. Conversation should occur but if
you continuously talk for a long period of time, it will become noticeable
that you need breaks in the conversation to catch your breath.
 
Recovery Runs
Recovery runs are very similar to normal distance runs, except the
pace is slower and the duration is typically shorter. The purpose of
recovery runs is, just as the name suggests, enhancing recovery. When
used in the day following a more intense workout, a recovery run helps
return the body to homeostasis and prepare the body for the subsequent
work to be done the following day. Often overlooked, recovery runs work
to enhance the supercompensation effect.
--- PAGE 372 ---
The pace of the recovery run should be slow enough so that it is
enhancing recovery, not prolonging it. The intensity needs to be low
enough so that minimal muscle damage is occurring and the primary fuel
source is fat so as not to delay glycogen replenishment. The exact pace
varies from individual to individual. Some athletes, such as many Kenyan
runners, will do recovery runs at paces that would be considered
ridiculously slow (8-9+min miles) for such elite athletes. On the other
hand, some runners react poorly to such slow running because their
biomechanics change and this causes a change in muscle tension, which
can leave them feeling flat and tired the next day. For FT runners this is
usually the case. The bottom line is pay attention to your body and how it
reacts. Many runners get caught in a no man’s land of training, where
there is no difference between their recovery pace and their normal
distance pace. This is a bad practice to get into.
The total distance of recovery runs is also an individual preference.
The aim should be to do enough that it enhances how you feel the next
day, but not so much that it hinders recovery. Generally, recovery runs
range from just a couple miles to up to around 10 miles in length. Once
you get over about 10 miles, for most people, no matter how slow they go,
it is no longer enhancing recovery.
For some runners, another option is to do what I call split recovery
runs. A split recovery run is when the total day’s mileage is split directly
in half into two separate runs. Many runners feel more recovered when
doing two short runs as opposed to one single run. An example would be
for a runner who needs 10 miles for the day, split it into  morning and
afternoon 5 mile runs. There are many elite level runners who do this. One
possible explanation is that by splitting the runs, it allows for certain
hormones beneficial to recovery to be released twice, thus keeping a
steady hormonal trigger throughout the day. Another explanation is that
splitting the runs reduces the impact on glycogen usage.
The bottom line is that the purpose of recovery runs is to enhance
adaptation by taking you through the adaptation phase quicker and getting
you prepared for the subsequent workout. The recovery runs and normal
distance runs should make up the bulk of the training.
 
--- PAGE 373 ---
Adding “Stuff” to Runs
 “Stuff” refers to strides, surges, pickups, or progressions during the
run or workout. Stuff is best seen as an add on to another type of run or
workout. They can be added on to normal distance runs, long runs, or
included in more intense workouts. When added to a normal distance run,
stuff is generally seen as not being very intense or taxing. On the other
hand, with long runs or faster workouts, the add on can be a full blown
intense session. How intense the add on is depends on the purpose of the
run.
 
Strides
The most basic and commonly used addition is strides post run.
Strides are short repeats of usually 100-150m in distance done at faster
speeds with plenty of recovery. Generally, strides are done at between 5k
and 1 mile pace depending on the goal. Strides after runs serve several
functions. First, they are a way to maintain speed during periods of heavy
aerobic running as they reinforce good biomechanics and the recruitment
of Fast Twitch muscle fibers. Second, strides can be used to work on
running form or work a little on muscle recruitment in a semi fatigued
state since they are performed after a distance run. Lastly, strides are a
way of altering muscle tension, which will be covered in a later chapter in
detail, which basically means it is a way of getting “pop” in the legs so
that the runner feels better the next day.
 
Surges
Along the same lines as strides is the addition of surges. Think of
surges as strides in the middle of the run. Surges consist of a gradual
increase in pace down to 5k pace or faster for approximately 15 to 60
seconds. The difference is that immediately following this surge, the
runner falls back into his earlier distance run pace for between 1-3
minutes before repeating the surge. Surges are not meant to be a workout,
but instead as a way to inject a little faster running into a normal distance
run. Surges train the body to be able to make a smooth transition to a
faster pace, a vital skill to be learned for racing, and train the body how to
--- PAGE 374 ---
efficiently recruit additional fibers with a pace change. What separates
surges from strides is that additional fiber recruitment occurs in the middle
of the run. This allows for not only recruitment of these fibers but also the
training of them as well since they can continue to be used in between
each surge. In addition, surges start the process of training the body how
to use lactate, as during the surge a small amount of lactate is produced,
which then can be used during the following recovery portion. Lastly,
surges serve as an excellent maintenance or transition method to faster
paced running when coming off of the base phase.
 
Example and Progression of Surges:
§  8 mile run with 6x30sec surge w/ 2:30 easy after each in the
middle
§  8 mile run with 6x45sec surge w/ 2:15 easy after each
§  8 mile run with 6x60sec surge with 2:00 easy after each
 
Pickups
The next addition is pickups, which refers to a gradual sustained
increase in pace near the end of the run. A pickup simply refers to what
one of my coaches referred to as “smelling the barn.” It is an increase in
pace over the final minutes of the run. Pickups serve both psychological
and physiological purposes. Psychologically, it ingrains the habit of
finishing runs strong. On the physiological side, pickups are a great way
to get a slight increase in aerobic stimulus at the end of the run and to
teach muscle fiber recruitment under mild fatigue. Pickups should be kept
to a minimum in terms of total length if the run is to be considered easy or
moderate. Longer pickups can be used as full-blown workouts, which will
be discussed later. An example of a pickup would be to have the last 2-10
minutes of a distance run done at an ever increasing pace. The pace can
progress down towards marathon pace or even lactate threshold.
 
Progressions
Lastly, progressions can be used to enhance the stimulus of a
distance run, long run, or workout. Progression runs or workouts are a
--- PAGE 375 ---
good way to get a slightly different stimulus. This occurs because the first
part of the progression serves to pre-fatigue the body. Thought of in terms
of muscle fibers, the first part will fatigue the easy to recruit fibers, thus
forcing more Fast Twitch or harder to recruit fibers, which aren’t normally
trained, to get involved as the pace progresses. In place of a distance run,
progression runs should be of moderate intensity, starting out at an easy
pace and progressing to marathon pace or slightly faster by the end. The
runners should feel invigorated at the end, not heavily fatigued from the
effort. If they feel heavily fatigued, then the progression was too intense
and serves as a workout in and of itself instead of replacing a moderate
distance run. These should usually be reserved for use during base training
periods when very few truly hard workouts are done. They serve as a great
way of transitioning from general training to faster high end aerobic type
work. Additionally, FT runners should use short moderate progressions in
the place of distance runs on occasion throughout the season. For them,
short progression runs allows for an aerobic stimulus that is a little more
specific to their race pace.
Another way to mix paces is progressions, which was used in the
context of long runs and normal distance runs. Progressions not only are
long gradual workouts but can also include very short interval
progressions. An interval progression would consist of running each split
of a particular interval slightly faster. An example might be doing 4x800m
starting at 5k pace but each 200m getting faster until you’re down to mile
pace by the end of each repetition. Similarly, progressions can simply be
“kick style” in which athletes run the first part of the interval at pace and
then accelerate to the finish for a designated portion of the interval. An
example of this might be 4x800m with the first 600m at 2 mile pace and
the last 200m accelerating to the finish. How the workout progresses is up
to the coach and can be done in a myriad of ways, but for now progression
runs and workouts include any run or repeat where the pace is
progressively increased.
Knowing when to add “stuff” is important. For each event, we’ll
cover how and when to include such additions. In terms of using them in
distance runs, some overall guidelines can be suggested. For the most part,
the use of strides or surges should serve as an easy way to do some speed
maintenance. Surges are slightly more intense than strides, so they better
--- PAGE 376 ---
serve as a way to transition to faster workouts. Strides can be done very
frequently, especially during the base phase, while surges should probably
be limited to a maximum of 2x per week, decreasing in amount as more
intensity is added. Pickups should be used even less. During the base
phase, one to a maximum of two distance runs with a pickup per week is
fine, and this should decrease to one every 1-2 weeks or so as the season
progresses. Finally, progression runs are to be used the least. During a
base phase they can be used once per week if no other intense workouts
are done, and once every 2 weeks if other intense work is being done.
During the season, they should be used as a sort of general aerobic
maintenance every 2-3 weeks. For Fast Twitch 800-1500m runners, short
progressions can be inserted more frequently, one every 1-2 weeks
throughout the year.
 
Long Runs
The long run is typically the holy grail of distance runners. For the
majority, it has its own dedicated day in which the long run is done
religiously. While the long run is very important, sometimes I feel that it is
given too much emphasis, especially for shorter distance runners. For the
marathoner, there is no doubt of its importance. The long run mostly
serves as a great way to increase general endurance, but for a marathoner
it can be used as a specific workout too.
First, the long run provides many of the positive adaptations
discussed in the Science section of this book, such as an increase in
mitochondria, capillarization, improved fuel system, etc. The long run also
provides the important benefit of preparing the body structurally.
Additionally, if we look at muscle fiber recruitment during a long run it
can be seen that this might be a way to train FT fibers aerobically. During
a long run, the easiest to recruit fibers will do all the work to begin with,
but as the duration extends, these will start to fatigue and run out of fuel.
When this occurs, additional fibers will be recruited to take up the
workload. If a run lasts long enough, then you will eventually get to the
point where you are training fibers aerobically that seldom get recruited in
such a way. If you think of what muscle fibers are doing the work during
most of your normal distance runs, it’s always the same ones since the
--- PAGE 377 ---
duration does not extend too much more than an hour or so in most cases.
This is not the case in the long run, which essentially serves as a way of
making sure the majority of the muscle fibers get trained aerobically.
 For the marathon runner, the most important benefits are the
structural and fuel system changes. Structurally the muscles, bones, and
joints adapt to the pounding necessary to run 26.2 miles. With each long
run, those structures get more resistant to fatigue from the pounding, with
the eventual goal of building a body that can handle a full marathon’s
worth of stress on the structural components. That is why the long run is
progressively increased.
The main factor when running a marathon is essentially how well
your fuel system is managed. First, a large carbohydrate store increases
the fuel supply. Secondly, the percentage of fats used compared to
carbohydrates plays a large role. The more that ratio shifts to fat at your
desired marathon pace, the more likely it is you’ll make it to the finish line
without hitting the wall and running out of fuel. For the marathoner, the
long run provides one of the ways in which to manipulate these variables.
Since adaptation does not occur unless the stimulus is strong
enough, the total fuel system is rarely challenged. Due to its length the
long run is the only workout done that will stress the total fuel supply.
Following a long run, the body will adapt by increasing its glycogen
storage, so that the dangerous decrease in glycogen does not occur next
time. The body’s other choice for preventing fuel shortage is to increase
the amount of fat used at that pace. While this is not of major consequence
at slower speeds, if we can get the body to change its fueling ratio at
marathon-specific speeds, then performance will be improved. That is one
of the reasons why we add “stuff” to long runs.
The same additions that can be added to distance runs can be tacked
onto long runs too. Unlike most normal distance runs, long runs can be
considered a workout. Therefore, when adding on stuff, it can be more
intense as ample recovery time will be given following the run. The basic
premise behind the additions is to force muscle fiber recruitment when
fatigued and to put the body in crisis so that glycogen-related adaptations
occur. Surges and strides are useful for ensuring most of the fiber types are
recruited and, in the case of surges, trained. Doing these at the end of a
long run is a good way to train the nervous system to send a strong enough
--- PAGE 378 ---
signal to recruit fibers when tired. Pickups and progressions are a great
way to train muscle fibers rarely recruited with a high end aerobic
stimulus. Progression and pickups also are the best way to change the fuel
system. The reason is that the first part of the long run depletes the fuel
stores to a large degree, and then the body is put under a large amount of
stress that leads to fuel system changes in the second half of the run when
a progression or pickup is introduced. In essence, we are using the first
half or ¾ of the run as a simple way to tire out the muscles that normally
do the work and deplete the glycogen stores. The real key is the last
additional bit which will then recruit and train the rarely used fibers and
put the body in crisis with low fuel so that it will make necessary
adaptations to prevent this from occurring again.
 
Long Run Details for Each Event
For shorter events and FT athletes the long run is simply there for
maintenance and strengthening the muscles and joints for general training.
The pace of the long run should be relatively easy and is not as important
for other groups. Depending on the runner, going too long could hinder
performance, especially for a FT runner. The longer the run is the more the
harder to recruit muscle fibers will be asked to carry the work load. This is
fine to an extent, but it is training these fibers to work very aerobically,
which can be counterproductive for an 800m or even 1,500m runner. For
this reason, for 800m runners, long runs should be kept to a maximum of
around 13 miles, with 10 miles being about average. No additional “stuff”
should be added, with the exception of maybe strides.
For the ST 1500m, 5k, and 10k runners, the long run increases in
importance. These runners can handle upwards of 17-18 miles for the
longer events with most long runs being in the 13-16mi range. These
volumes pertain to runners training at a high level; for lower level runners
the volume should be reduced to a suitable level. Unlike most books, I do
not believe that the long run should be a set percentage of total mileage.
Instead, think of the long run as a run or workout in and of itself and think
of the desired benefit for that run. These runners will benefit from small
additions that focus more on muscle fiber recruitment when tired, as
--- PAGE 379 ---
opposed to fuel system changes. The chart below demonstrates a sample
long run progression once mileage is built for these runners:
 
§   13 miles with 6x45sec surges with 1:45 easy between at the end
§   14 miles easy
§   13miles with 5min pickup down to marathon pace at the end
§   15 miles easy                                              
§   12 miles with last 4mi progressive from easy to steady to final mile
at marathon pace
§   14 miles with 6x100m strides after
 
The long run for the marathon runner is of central importance. It
should be a main focus and main workout of the schedule. Early on, the
emphasis should be on accumulating volume, up to around 22 miles, to
prepare the body structurally. As volume reaches higher levels, additions
should be introduced that focus on primarily the fuel system. Since this is
a full blown workout for the marathoner, the additions will be longer and
more intense than with the other runners. How to progress a marathoner’s
long run will be discussed in the marathon training chapter.
Lastly, before we move on from the long run, the timing of the long
run should also be considered. As a rule of thumb, the more intense the
long run, the more it needs to be treated as a separate workout with an
easy day or two before and after. The marathoner almost always treats it as
a workout and needs an easy day before and after. For the other events, it
depends on the desired purpose and intensity. A long run the day after a
workout works well to increase strength endurance. When this is done, the
long run should be mostly recovery to easy pace with no or only small
additions tacked on.
 
Tempo/Threshold Running
Whether it is called a tempo, threshold, or steady state run, these all
refer to a longer sustained effort. The duration can be as short as 10
minutes to as long as 70 minutes, depending on the intensity. Similarly,
the intensity can vary greatly from 10k pace to marathon pace or a little
slower. While some try to pinpoint an exact intensity for these types of
--- PAGE 380 ---
workouts, the fact is that the intensity varies with the purpose of the
workout. To avoid confusion, I use the word tempo when talking about
any long sustained effort, making sure to define the intended intensity,
whether it is threshold (half marathon pace), a marathon pace run, or a
long steady run.
The intensity is probably the hardest thing to keep under control for
these types of workouts. For almost all of these intensities, the pace is
slow enough so that it feels only comfortably hard. Given that we have an
ingrained idea of hard work must equal better results, the tendency is to
push the pace too much. For marathon pace runs for a marathoner, the
pace is easily identifiable and of central importance. For runner’s not
training for a marathon or half marathon, it is often best to do these
workouts by feel. Marathon pace runs should be moderate with breathing
being elevated but under control. The runner should be able to say a few
sentences in between breaths if they have to. The stressor in marathon
pace runs is not the pace, but instead the distance.
On the other hand, threshold runs are slightly more intense. They
once again should be comfortably hard, but under control. The breathing
is more intense but should not be labored. A good way to test whether you
are running above or below threshold is the talking test. You should be
able to say one or two short sentences, such as “I feel good, I feel great. I
want to communicate.” Only towards the end of that sentence should the
sensation to breathe again be present. The breathing test is a good way for
the runner to receive instant feedback, and in fact when just beginning
threshold training, it is best to forget about splits and focus on feel.
While many programs will give a set distance to cover or time to run
for the threshold work, this sometimes causes the runner to be “holding
on” during the latter portion of the workout. While this is fine in some
instances, for the majority of the threshold work, unless used for specific
training, the goal is a hard but under control workout that results in feeling
invigorated, not torn down. To combat this “survival mode” phenomenon,
I prefer to do what I call split threshold runs, where I give a total time
needed to spend at threshold and the runners get to split it up with short
breaks. How they get to this total time is not strict or that important. Since
the goal is to have internal adaptations and not getting comfortable at
some set pace, what is going on internally is what is most important. For
--- PAGE 381 ---
this reason, athletes are told to keep running at threshold until they feel
like they are going over the edge or slowing, then to stop and jog 1-3
minutes. Following the jog, they then continue to run at threshold until
either the total time has been accumulated or they go over the edge again
and have to stop and jog for a short period of time. For younger runners to
prevent abuse of this trust, I will sometimes suggest how many times they
are allowed to split it up. Generally, 25min or less I let them split it once,
30min twice, and anything over 3 times. What I’ve found is that this
allows runners to have a slightly less stressing workout mentally, allows
for the same adaptations as a threshold run with no breaks, and allows for
a higher total volume of threshold work.
 
Progression of Thresholds
By using this method, progression is also quiet easy. Progress by
increasing the total time to be spent at threshold each workout by several
minutes. For example, in the early base phase the workout might be 15min
total at threshold, which then progresses to 20min, 25min, and so on.
Around 35min total is the maximum for well-trained runners without it
being very taxing. Workouts that include over 35min of total work at
threshold can be used, especially for half marathon runners, but should be
used sparingly and with plenty of rest and recovery.   
There are two other ways to progress thresholds that deserve
mention. First, uphill thresholds should be used as a way to further
enhance high end aerobic ability when it seems like a ceiling has been
reached. By running the threshold session uphill the stress is slightly
changed because there is an increase and change in muscle fiber
recruitment when running uphill. While most of us don’t have a hill long
enough, using a treadmill is an effective way. Set the treadmill at 3-4%
incline at a fast but comfortably hard speed; then increase the incline
every 2 minutes until you get an intensity that feels like threshold
according to the talk test. Another way to progress thresholds is by adding
short surges during the threshold. The short surges of 20-60sec should be a
gradual increase in the pace and then a return to threshold. This will allow
for a small amount of lactate to be injected into the system and then used
during the subsequent threshold section. Further details on how to
--- PAGE 382 ---
implement and manipulate tempos or thresholds are included in each of
the chapters on training for each event.
 
Sprints
On the opposite end of the spectrum from endurance or threshold
work is pure sprint training. Since pure sprint training serves as general
speed for each event, I’ll cover it in depth here. The amount and type of
sprint training that should be done depends on the event and type of
runner, so the exact details of how and what will be covered in those
events chapters. Sprint training for distance runners is essential, but few
coaches utilize it. The reason given is usually injury concerns, but, like
almost everything, when done correctly the injury risk is relatively low.
What are the actual benefits of sprint training for distance runners?
One of the most important is in terms of muscle fiber recruitment.
Sprinting is one of the only ways in which a distance runner is going to
recruit a very large amount of his harder to recruit FT fibers. Why is this
important? First, because in learning how to recruit these muscle fibers,
you are increasing the recruitable fiber pool. Having those fibers available
to jump in and do some of the work when those ST fibers are being
overwhelmed will help an athlete sustain his pace for slightly longer.
Second, it allows for the athlete to more easily recruit these fibers at the
end of a race when it is time to kick. Lastly, a distance runner rarely
stresses his CNS to such a high degree in such a short term. Since
everything begins and ends in the brain and CNS, doing some work to
deal with a high stress on the CNS could help with central fatigue.
Besides the muscle recruitment aspects of sprinting, there are
mechanical benefits too. Sprinting provides an excellent platform to work
on and improve running mechanics. You will find few athletes who sprint
while landing on their heel like many do during distance running, so
translating the mechanics of sprinting while landing (more) correctly to
distance running can be done. Also, sprint training can improve the body’s
elastic energy storage and return system. The body will become better at
stiffening the lower leg upon impact, thus improving energy storage and
return. In addition, sprinting can improve ground contact time for distance
runners.
--- PAGE 383 ---
The most important and overlooked part in successful utilization of
sprint training is to actually teach someone how to sprint. Correcting
mistakes early and establishing a good foundation on sprinting mechanics
early on will save a lot of trouble later, not to mention make for a quicker
progression. How to run correctly is covered in the Biomechanics chapter.
 It goes beyond just having good running form though. Distance
runners need to learn how to truly sprint. It is our nature to try and push
harder or increase the effort when we want to run faster. However, this
does not work for sprinting. There's a point where trying to increase the
effort does more harm than good. When you see most distance runners
sprint, they really try to bear down and force it. Compare this to the
relatively relaxed sprinting of someone like Usain Bolt. Teaching the
concept of relaxed sprinting is essential. To do this, I suggest having
runners do their initial sprint training at sub-maximum speeds. A good
speed is usually around 400m pace. It is still fast, yet since it is only
100m, the athletes can still get the concept of relaxation while moving
fast. As they grasp the concept, increase the speed while trying to get them
to keep the same relaxation.
Ideally, this step of teaching relaxed sprinting or relaxed fast
running is the first step. However, in many cases, such as when working
with a large group of HS runners, this can't be done. It is not the end of the
world if you skip this first step. Why? Because, with the progression I've
outlined below, it is very easy for runners to discover how to sprint with
only minor coaching cues.
 
Progression of Sprint Training
The first step is Hill Sprints. These are becoming exceedingly
popular for distance runners recently, thanks in large part to Renato
Canova and later Brad Hudson. In reality distance runners, and even more
so, sprinters have been doing short hill sprints for a long time, it's just
never been popularized as a key to training.
Hill Sprints work as a great introduction to sprinting because it is
almost impossible to get hurt doing them. One reason is that it is harder to
sprint wrong while doing them. Sprinting up a hill requires correct foot
placement and really emphasizes hip extension. Finally, by sprinting
--- PAGE 384 ---
uphill the force requirement is much higher, thus more muscle fibers are
recruited.
The slope of the hill depends on the purpose. A steeper slope is used
for more strength and a gradual slope used when the goal is for speed.
Since these are acting as an introduction for pure speed work, a moderate
hill should be used initially before progressing to a more gradual one as
time goes by. Start out with only a handful (4-5) of sprints that take 8-
10sec and take full recovery in between. Full recovery is needed because
these are max intensity repeats and that means at least 2-3min between
each. To keep myself and athletes I've worked with from doing these with
too little recovery, we used to play a rousing game of throw the rock at a
pole to see who could hit the pole the most times during the entire hill
sprint session. It may seem trivial, but it served its purpose of keeping the
recovery long enough. For distance runners used to short recovery
periods, it is often a task to get someone to rest long enough. The sprints
are initially so short that most runners don't feel fatigued after the first
couple, so they rush the recovery. So, to keep them from doing this,
throwing rocks at a pole can be very helpful.
These hill sprints start during the base period and are done once
perhaps twice a week. Each week, the number of hill sprints is increased
until the runners get to around 10. Sometimes the length is also slightly
increased (from 8 sec to 10 sec). After several weeks of hill sprints, the
transition then shifts to flat sprints
 
Flat Sprints
The Hill sprints serve to prepare athletes for flat sprints. These are,
preferably, done on the track. Even more so than with hill sprints, the
tendency is for runners to try to tense up when running at maximum
speed. To prevent this, I often say that these are to be done at around 95%.
This prevents them from "forcing" the speed and overstraining to run fast.
To start with, the length of these sprints is generally 60m. Once
again, full rest is needed, even more than with hill sprints. After building
up to 8-10 hill sprints, I normally start off athletes with 4 flat sprints
because they are more demanding physically and on the nervous system.
Once flat sprints are introduced there is a gradual progression. For most
--- PAGE 385 ---
runners transitioning to flat sprints, begin by alternating between doing
hill sprints and flat sprints each week. After this the exact progression
depends on the type of athlete and the event. Shorter distance runners
(800-1,500m) and FT type runners benefit more from flat sprints, while
ST runners tend to benefit more from hill sprints. Both groups benefit
from following the initial progression of hill sprints first and then flat
sprints. During this transition is when the emphasis and details of what
kind of sprint work they should use changes.
 
 Speed Endurance
The final step in the sprint progression is extending speed to speed
endurance. This step is sometimes not used at all or greatly deemphasized
depending on the goal event and athlete type. For shorter events and FT
runners, speed endurance can serve as general endurance or speed support.
While more will be covered in the event sections for these athletes, the
progression should continue to speed endurance.
Speed endurance reps refer to max or near max sprints that last up to
about 40sec or 300m in length. The goal is to extend your maximum
speed. These can be done after both hill sprints and flat sprints or as a
workout by itself. Which kind of sprints we will use  depends on the
training emphasis, goal, and time of the year. The general principles for
adding speed endurance are the same for both types of sprints. First cut
back on the pure sprints and initially add one rep of speed endurance at
the end. For hill sprints, cut back from 10 to 5, and add in one 15-20sec
sprint uphill at the end. For flat sprints, cut back from something like
5x100m to 3x60-80m with one 150m full sprint at the end.
The progression for speed endurance is similar to the other sprints.
First add one or maybe two more reps. Then slightly increase the length of
the reps up to a maximum of 250-300m. For almost every runner except
FT 800m types, speed endurance sessions are best done in combination
with pure sprint work. For FT 800m runners, a separate workout of
entirely speed endurance work can be done.
--- PAGE 386 ---
Interval/Repeat Workouts
Intervals and repeats are self-explanatory and should be familiar to
all runners reading this book. The only confusion that could occur is that
some coaches differentiate the meaning of intervals and repeats based on
the speed and rest taken. Instead, in this book they will be treated as the
same with the specifics of rest and intensity given in the details of the
workout.
Briefly, intervals refer to running segments of various lengths with
rest periods in between. These workouts can also be broken into sets. Sets
allow for a larger rest period inserted in the middle of the workout, for
example instead of doing 10x400m with 60sec rest, breaking it into sets
would make the workout 2x (5x400) with 60sec rest between repeats, and
5min between sets. These workouts can be manipulated in an endless
number of ways depending on the purpose of the workout. The intensity,
rest periods, set numbers, and how paces change or progress are all factors
that can change the purpose of the workout. Contrary to popular belief
intervals are not only for speed or anaerobic development but can be used
for aerobic support or even general endurance development. The
manipulation of the intervals determines its effect. Next, a couple of the
common ways to use intervals will be discussed.
 
Aerobic Intervals
Aerobic intervals are interval sessions that are manipulated in such a
way that while you may be running at faster speeds, the metabolic stress
--- PAGE 387 ---
and the adaptation is an aerobic one. To accomplish this goal, the interval
distance is kept very short, with short rest periods in between intervals, a
low total volume, and possibly long rest periods between sets. While the
details differ on the desired result, the interval distance is generally kept
less than 600m and is often in the 100-200m range. While the pace is
faster than what is usually considered an aerobic workout, because of the
aforementioned manipulations, the paces can be as fast as even 800m
pace, and the benefits are almost entirely coming from the endurance side.
It is best to think of this as a mini workout or as easy pace/rhythm work
where the runners learn how to run relaxed at a faster pace.
This type of workout is ideal for 800-1,500m and FT type runners as
it allows for running at a pace that is closer to specificity yet highly
aerobic. That is why these types of workouts can serve as general or
aerobic support for those events. Similarly, for longer event groups,
aerobic intervals allow for running at speed type intensities without the
negative stress of an intense workout. That’s why they are a great way to
transition into harder interval sessions or to use as a maintenance type
workout throughout the year. Lastly, they work well during the peaking
period to provide just enough stimulus and can function as a way to
ingrain race pace.
Another use for short aerobic intervals is to teach the body to use
lactate as a fuel and enhance recovery. Lactate can be used as an energy
source through the lactate shuttle. One goal of training is to teach your
body how to use lactate as a fuel at higher intensities. The best way to do
this is through alternation work, but another option is to use aerobic
interval work in the middle of a more intense interval session. This can be
accomplished by inserting moderate 100-300m segments in the middle of
an interval as part of the “recovery.” Instead of doing 4x800m at 3k or 5k
pace with 2-3 minutes rest, change the rest to 100m jog then 3x150m at
10k-threshold pace with 50m jog then 100m jog and start the next 1000m.
These types of aerobic intervals were developed in the 1950’s by world
class coach, Mihaly Igloi.
Besides promoting lactate use/clearance, it also aids in recovery. If
you see a runner struggling during an intense workout and you still want
him to get in more volume of training, a good way is to insert a couple of
--- PAGE 388 ---
short aerobic intervals. By doing the short aerobic intervals, the athlete
gets in some work, which helps him mentally, and aids in recovery.
An example of this would be if during 6x800m at 5k down to 3k
pace the athlete is struggling hard after 4, insert 3x200m at 10k-LT w/
easy 200m. Then give him 2min rest and finish with the last 2x800. For
these intervals use relaxed 100s, 150s, 200s, 300s, etc. at 3k to threshold
type paces in the middle of workouts, or in between sets, such as inserting
150m easy strides in between sets of 2x5x400 at mile pace w/ 60sec
recovery. While the details of how to use aerobic intervals will be
discussed in the chapter on each event group, below are some examples of
aerobic intervals and their uses:
 
Aerobic Interval Examples:
Hill Repeats
One way to progress and overload a workout is to add a hill
component to it. The hill component slightly changes the stress due to a
different muscle fiber recruitment pattern. Hills increase the force
required, so a greater number of fibers are recruited.
The incline of the hill obviously plays a role. The more gradual the
hill, the more the emphasis is on speed, while the steeper the hill the more
strength plays a role. Almost any type of workout can be done as a hill
work if the goal is to add a strength component. Longer hill (400+ meters)
repeats are great for enhancing strength endurance, while shorter and
faster repeats (less than 400m) work well to increase the speed side of the
component or specific speed endurance.
In addition to doing straight hill repeats, hills can be blended into
the workout so that portions of the workout are done on the flat ground
and portions on a hill. By doing the workout this way, you are introducing
--- PAGE 389 ---
a strength component that will force muscle fiber recruitment during the
hill session and then train those fibers during the flat ground. An example
of this would be to do 400m repeats with every 400m alternating between
being on flat ground and on a hill.
Lastly, hill repeats are useful as a way to transition to faster work
and to delay a peak. Often runners and coaches get in trouble with peaking
early because they do too much specific or speed type work too quickly.
One workaround to this problem is to make more of the speed type
sessions be hill repeat sessions. Use your imagination, and use hills as a
way to further progress a workout.
 
Alternations
Alternations were briefly covered in the Individualization chapter,
but to refresh, they consist of alternating a faster and a slower segment
with no rest in between. Or as the namesake says, alternating faster
running with recovery segments. One key point is that the recovery
segment is not a slow jog but is a steady effort that allows just enough
recovery so that the subsequent faster portion can be completed.
Alternations can be used for anything from marathon pace running to all
the way down to 400m pace. The difference lies in the lengths of the two
segments and the paces of each.
The basic premise behind alternation work is that the slower
segment does not allow for full recovery; the athlete has to work to stay
on target during the slower segment. Oftentimes it is not the faster
segment that gives athletes problems; it is the slower segment. In looking
at the lactate fatigue theory, alternations work to progressively adapt the
body to working at higher and higher steady lactate levels because lactate
is produced during the faster portion and then if the recovery portion is
done at a steady pace, lactate remains elevated. In elite athletes,
alternations can be used to develop a lactate steady state at 5k to Half
Marathon paces.
The faster the paces of the alternation segment lengths will be, the
shorter the segment lengths for the fast portion. They can be as short as
50m for 400m pace, but usually in the 100-400m range for 800-1,500m
pace. For 5k-10k pace the faster lengths can start at 200-400m but
--- PAGE 390 ---
generally progress to 800-1,000m lengths for 5k pace and up to 1mile or
slightly more for 10k pace. For the half and full marathon, the lengths can
span several miles. As you have probably noticed, the idea is to progress
these workouts as fitness improves. Progression can be done in several
ways including increasing the pace of the recovery portion, increasing the
length of the faster portion, or decreasing the length of the recovery
portion.
Early on, the recovery portion lengths are much longer than the
faster portions, but as the season progresses the goal should be to make
the two segment lengths come together so that eventually the faster
portion length is longer than the recovery portion. Similarly, the pace of
the recovery portion should start off far away from the faster portion and
inch closer as the season progresses. Initially the recovery portion can be a
pace that is done on steady distance runs, but it should work its way down
to close to marathon pace or faster depending on the goal. The recovery
portion’s pace impacts what is worked on in terms of lactate. If the pace is
slower, then the body is training to use lactate during the recovery portion.
If the pace is more intense, or close to lactate threshold, then lactate is in
balance during the recovery portion and the body is learning how to deal
with a higher lactate steady state. The former would be useful for a
marathon or general endurance, while the latter would be useful for a
1,500-10k runner’s specific endurance. Total volume depends on the type
of alternation workout done and at what level the athlete is at. Start with
modest lower volumes and increase progressively. A good rule of thumb
for all paces shorter than half marathon is to max out the volume at around
that race distance or slightly longer for the 5k-10k paces and around 1.5x
race distance for the shorter race paces.
Alternations can be used for every purpose, running the gamut from
aerobic support to specific endurance to speed endurance. How to exactly
use alternations for each purpose will be covered in that event group’s
chapter. For some general guidelines, alternating race pace with a steady
effort can develop specific endurance. Aerobic support and direct
endurance support for most events can be done by alternating two close
but aerobic speeds (such as 10k and marathon pace). Direct speed support
can be done by alternating a pace that is faster than specific with a steady
recovery portion (such as the classic 200m at mile pace, 200m at steady
--- PAGE 391 ---
pace for a 3k runner). Lastly, speed endurance (also general speed, or
anaerobic support for some groups) can be accomplished by alternating a
near max speed for a short distance of 50m with a short recovery distance
(of 50m in this example) where the runner simply relaxes and takes his
foot off the gas. These speed endurance alternations are very intense, thus
volume is limited to around 400m per set, and only a handful of sets are
done.
 
Example Progression of Alternation Workout
for 5k Specific Endurance:
·       4 miles of alternating 200m at 5k pace w/ 1400m at steady pace (5:50
pace)
·       4mi of alternating 400 at 5k pace w/ 1200m at steady pace (5:45 pace)
·       4mi of alternating 600 at 5k pace w/ 1000m at steady pace (5:40 pace)
·       4mi of alternating 800 at 5k pace w/ 800m at steady pace (5:40 pace)
·       4mi of alternating 900 at 5k pace w/ 700m at steady pace (5:40 pace)
 
 Combo Workouts
Combo workouts mean exactly what it sounds like. It is the
combining of two or more different workout types or intensities. As an
example for a 5k runner looking to work on aerobic support and pure
speed, a runner might do 20 minutes at threshold followed by 6x10sec
sprints. Another example would be to combine 1,000m repeats at 5k pace
with a set of 200’s at mile pace at the end. The combo does not have to
just be two intensities but can include several different ones. For an
aerobic refresh, a combo workout might be 10min at marathon pace, 7min
at threshold pace, 4min at 10k pace, and 2min at 5k pace.
Combo workouts are mostly used as transitions or maintenance
work, but occasionally they are used when a specific adaptation is
required, such as strength endurance. To use as a transition workout,
simply do ¾ of the intended workout and then add in a small segment at
the next categorization level. For example in transition from aerobic
support to direct support for a 5k runner, they would do 25min at
threshold followed by a short break and 5min at 10k pace. The latter
--- PAGE 392 ---
portion would act as an introduction to direct support (10k pace).
Similarly, the combining of several different intensities or categorization
levels provides an excellent maintenance stimulus. The aforementioned
aerobic refresh workout is a prime example of a maintenance workout.
 
Blend Workouts
Blend workouts are when two or more different intensities are
intermixed and serve as a way of connecting them. Most training
programs move abruptly from one type of workout to another; instead
there should be some form of connection that integrates the various
workout types. Blend workouts are one way to accomplish this and are
very useful for transitioning and bringing the speed and endurance
component together. There are several different ways to use blend
workouts. The changes of paces back and forth within the workout cause
several unique physiological events. First, muscle fiber recruitment is
constantly changed, as are lactate levels. During the faster portion, more
fibers are recruited, and more lactate is produced. Then during the slower
portions the runner has to deal with higher lactate levels than normal at
that pace. Essentially, by doing the workout this way, the metabolic stress
that is seen during the race is mimicked and can be introduced much
earlier.
In addition, muscle fibers that are recruited during the fast portion,
likely extend their endurance during the slower portion. Depending on the
desired adaptation, the difference in pace can be quiet large or quiet
narrow. Generally a long and short segment is included in blends. You can
blend with an equal 1 to 1 ratio of long and short or change the ratio to
include more long or short segments depending on what the focus is. An
example of a blend workout would be 1000, 400, 900, 300, 800, 200 with
the long segments at 5k pace and the short at mile pace with 3min rest
between. An example of a complex blend is: 900 (5k pace), 400(1mi
pace), 800 (3k pace), 300 (800 pace), 500 (1mi pace). The possibilities are
endless as to how these are manipulated and depend on the desired goal.
While more in depth discussion on how to use blend workouts will be
covered shortly, there are several options as to what paces you choose and
how to progress including:
--- PAGE 393 ---
 
 
 
1. Start with slower paces at both the long and short segments and progress
downwards.
a. This starts as aerobic support for race pace and progresses to
specific endurance and then to speed endurance
2. Start with the extremes and progress towards specificity. This means it
starts as general or special support and then progresses towards
specific endurance.
a. In this case, the early workouts train for fiber recruitment and
progressively train endurance of those fibers.
b. For example: start with LT+ hill sprints, progress to 10k/1600 then
to 5k/3200 if the 5k is your specific pace.
 
Maintenance Workouts
I’ve mentioned before that all categories of training are included
during each phase of training; it is just the emphasis that changes. Once
something is built, it takes much less work to maintain it. Given this
concept, once a component is built and the emphasis changes, it goes into
maintenance mode. That means that a small stimulus needs to be applied
every ~2 weeks depending on what that component is. The question is
how much is needed for a maintenance mode?
A good rule of thumb is that maintenance workouts should be about
½ to ¾ of what the workout for that component was when you were
building it. For example, for threshold runs, if you built up to 30min total,
then 15-20min total would serve as maintenance. Since it takes less of a
stimulus, a good way to maintain various components is to use combo
workouts to combine two or more paces. The one exception to this rule is
long runs. While volume can be decreased slightly for maintenance long
runs, it should not be cut as dramatically as seen in other workouts
because the volume itself is the stimulus. Instead of cutting the distance by
up to a half, only a few miles should be taken off during a maintenance
long run. The difference is that a maintenance long run should occur at an
easy pace.
--- PAGE 394 ---
For the maintenance of most aerobic components (general
endurance, aerobic support, and direct endurance support) a moderate
fartlek or a breakdown interval session does the job well. Simply use a
descending ladder to hit each intensity once or twice to serve as
maintenance. An example for maintaining general endurance and aerobic
support for a 5k runner would be 10min at marathon pace, 7min at
threshold, 5min at 10k, 3min at 10k with a couple minutes jog in between.
For general endurance for many events, long runs serve as maintenance,
or even slight pickups during distance runs will have the same effect.
On the other hand, the speed side is often best maintained with easy
intervals or rhythm work. These workouts do not have to be extremely
taxing. 100s-400s with relatively long rest at anaerobic support and direct
support paces accomplish the goal. 6x300 switching between 1mile and
800 pace is an example for a 3,000m runner. Additionally, a short segment
can be added on as a combo to the end of other workouts, such as doing a
set of 4x200 after a threshold. Pure speed is the easiest to maintain as
doing a set of hill sprints or doing flying 100m repeats after a distance run
or event specific workout is never hard to fit in.
 
Specific Workouts
Before explaining how to bring this all together for each separate
race distance, the concept of specific endurance needs to be thoroughly
explained. There are several universal concepts on building specific
endurance that apply to every event. As mentioned previously, specific
endurance refers to increasing the length that a runner can last at a given
pace. This is best understood using the fatigue theories discussed; specific
endurance is increased when fatiguing factors at race pace are reduced, the
rate of accumulation of fatiguing factors is decreased, and/or the
maximum amount of fatiguing factors that a runner can withstand over the
entire race distance is increased.
With specific endurance training, the goal is to progress the training
so that the runner can adapt to an ever increasing workload. If the runner
is able to handle a higher workload via changes in interval length, total
volume, rest periods, or speed, then one of the three adaptations happened
which resulted in an increase in specific endurance. The runner either
--- PAGE 395 ---
reduced fatigue products at race pace, decreased the rate of accumulation
of fatigue, or increased the maximum amount they could withstand. What
occurred depends on how the specific endurance workout was progressed.
There are several different ways to go about creating and developing
specific endurance. Most runners should come at specific endurance
development from at least two different ways. Each event and runner type
will respond slightly better to a different method of development.
The pattern of development is to start with very small spices of
specific work during the base phase, such as surges or rhythm intervals,
and gradually increase the workload until it reaches its highest 2 weeks
before the peak race.
 
The different methods of developing specific endurance include:
·       Alternations
·       Bottom up- Intervals are run at specific pace and the length is
progressively increased
·       Top down- The distance of the intervals is present, the pace is
progressively increased to a more specific pace
·       Blend- Use blend workouts to work from the extreme pace of
endurance and speed in the same workout and bring them together.
 
The easiest way to develop and progress specific endurance is figure
out what the starting point is and then decide where you are going with the
workout. In other words, determine what is the last specific workout that
is needed for your race. This last workout provides the destination. If you
have the starting point and the finish point, coming up with the in between
is relatively simple. In designing a final workout, keep in mind that you
want it to be a challenging workout that is highly specific to the race. That
means relatively long intervals at the pace they want to run with relatively
short rest in between. Examples of final specific workouts for each group
are listed below:
 
 
Example Final Specific Workouts:
--- PAGE 396 ---
Bottom Up Method
The bottom up method starts with short intervals with very short rest
in between reps but the reps are split into sets so that it is feasible. In
addition, the total volume of the session matches the total volume of the
final workout from the beginning. To progress, the distance of the reps is
gradually increased and the numbers of sets are diminished. Below is an
example of this progression.
Bottom up Method for 5k:
Top-Down Method
The top down method is also the traditional way to increase specific
endurance. Roger Bannister’s advisor/coach Franz Stampfl was one of the
earlier advocates of this system. For Americans it is better demonstrated in
the Bowerman or Oregon method of training in which intervals were run
at date pace that progressively increased to goal race pace. An example
would be to start by doing 400’s at 68sec in the fall and progress to doing
400’s at 60sec at the end of the season for a miler aiming at 4 minutes.
The central idea is that the distance is there and the pace is increased or
the rest manipulated. Since the pace starts off slower than goal pace, the
early sessions serve as aerobic or direct support training and only later
become specific endurance training. An example of this type of
progression for a mile runner with a goal of running 60sec pace is:
·       10x400m with 30sec rest in 68
·       10x400m with 45sec rest in 66
·       10x400m with 60sec rest in 64
·       2x(5x400m) with 60sec rest and 3min between sets in 62
--- PAGE 397 ---
·       2x(5x400m) with 60sec rest and 3min between sets in 60
·       10x400m with 75sec rest in 60
·       10x400m with 60sec rest in 60
·       2x(5x400m) with first set in 60, second in 59 with 60sec rest and 3min
between sets.
 
Alternation Method
The alternation method of creating specific endurance consists of
alternating one segment at specific pace and the other at a recovery pace.
Like in the other specific work, the amount of specific work is gradually
increased. This is done by increasing the length of the specific segment
and/or decreasing the length of the recovery segment. In addition, the
recovery segment’s pace can be increased so that it is closer to specific
pace. These alternation workouts provide a different kind of stimulus than
traditional race pace work and is a great way to create specific endurance.
Below is an example of a progression of alternation workouts:
 
·       4 miles of alternating 200m at 5k pace w/ 1400m at steady pace
(5:50 pace)
·       4mi of alternating 400 at 5k pace w/ 1200m at steady pace (5:45
pace)
·       4mi of alternating 600 at 5k pace w/ 1000m at steady pace (5:40
pace)
·       4mi of alternating 800 at 5k pace w/ 800m at steady pace (5:40 pace)
·       4mi of alternating 900 at 5k pace w/ 700m at steady pace (5:40 pace)
 
Blend Method
The Blend method consists of using workouts to emphasize the
extremes of speed and endurance and then bring them together. By doing
the workouts this way, the early focus is on developing support from each
side, while getting more specific as the workout progresses. The blend
workout does not have to culminate in an entire specific workout, but
instead can keep more elements of the endurance or speed side depending
on whether the goal is to develop strength endurance or speed endurance
--- PAGE 398 ---
at specific paces. An example for a miler trying to run 60sec quarters is as
follows:
 
·       4x(1200,Hill Sprint) with 1200 at 10k pace and 3min rest between
everything.
·       3x(1,000, 200) with 1min rest between reps, 3min between sets, 1000m
at 5k pace and 200 at 800 pace
·       3x(800, 300) with 1min rest b/t reps, 3min b/t sets, 800 is at 3k pace,
300 at mile pace.
·       3x(600,200) with 45sec rest b/t reps, 3min b/t sets, 600 and 200 at mile
pace.
Putting it Together
Combining the different ways of developing specific endurance is a
good way to diversify the stimulus and makes sure that every runner gets a
training stimulus that is effective. Certain methods will be better for
different runner types and events. Any of the combinations can work, but
below is an example of combining the alternation and bottom up method.
 
During base phase: 8x30sec at race pace w/ 2:30 easy in the middle
of an easy 8 mile run. Then progress to:
 
·       3 x (4x400) at 5k w/ 30sec rest. 5min b/t sets
·       4mi of alternating 400 at 5k pace w/ 1200m at steady pace
·       3x(3x600) at 5k w/ 40sec rest. 5min b/t sets
·       4mi of alternating 600 at 5k pace w/ 1000m at steady pace
·       2x(3x800) at 5k w/ 45sec rest. 5min b/t sets
·       4mi of alternating 800 at 5k pace w/ 800m at steady pace
·       5x1000m at 5k pace w/ 90sec rest
 
Lydiard Style Time Trials
Although not a style of progression to create specific endurance,
Lydiard style time trials are a good way to bring everything together as the
last specific workout. A Lydiard time trial is when you complete the race
distance at a very strong, but under control pace or when you run at or
near goal pace for around ¾ of the race distance. In the former type, you
--- PAGE 399 ---
are adjusting to running a strong pace for the entire race distance. The
pace of such an effort should be about 2-4% slower than your actual race
pace over that distance. The latter method is used to adapt to running race
pace for a longer period of time than normal in training. Oftentimes, past
around the halfway point a runner is in new territory in terms of how far
they have run at that pace before. By doing a trial at around ¾ of the
event, the runner gets to experience that feeling in practice. These time
trials are also good feedback on how a runner is developing and where to
go from there on with the training.
All of these methods in creating specific endurance work well.
Which one you use depends on the type of athlete you have (remember FT
vs. ST) and what you are trying to accomplish. For example, using the
alternation approach will probably be more suited to a ST athlete because
the ‘rests’ are kept at a decent pace. A FT runner might not be able to
accomplish the workout because he won’t recover as quickly on the rests.
On the other hand, using some of the alternation progression might help
that FT athlete work on his weakness and improve his ability to deal with
lactate while running at a steady pace. Consider this example and the
athletes themselves when choosing your preferred progression.
--- PAGE 400 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 402 ---
19

--- PAGE 403 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 404 ---
Bringing It All Together:
Periodization
“No matter how successful you are, change is always good. There
can never be a status quo.” Billy Beane
 
It is finally time to put everything together. All of the workout types,
goals, and theories are defined. Now let’s look at how to mix everything
together and come out with the best race performance possible. Training is
not something that occurs in a one-season vacuum that ignores all training
done before or to be done after. Instead, training interacts and is fluid in
nature. We will take the all-encompassing approach and look at how
training should develop throughout ones career as well as within the
season.
 
The Big Picture: Periodization Within
a Career
One major problem with most training theories is that they have one
overarching model of training and there is little variation. What they are
basically saying is that with only minor adjustments in volume or intensity
a developing High School runner should follow the exact same program as
a Master’s runner. Knowing that the goal of training is to change runners
on a physiological level and knowing the changes in our physiology as we
develop, how can the same program be optimal for all runners? The
answer is that it can’t. Instead we’ll outline the ideal development of
training as an athlete grows. Obviously, we do not live in an ideal world,
so sometimes certain phases of the training have to be accelerated in the
real world, but the concepts and progressions hold true.
Legendary distance coach Joe Vigil is fond of saying that American
runners are tens of thousands of miles behind our African counterparts
when we start running. His point is that by the time our runners start in
High School, the African runners have accumulated a large volume of
training by living an active lifestyle. Whether this consists of running
--- PAGE 405 ---
several miles to and from school every day or performing hard work on
the land, African runners are establishing a very large general fitness base.
Several prominent coaches have stated this as the reason for their
dominance.
During these developmental years, the analogy is always that you
are laying a foundation on which to build your house. The larger and
better constructed the foundation, the more room for the intricacies of the
house. The finishing touches of the house are the more intense workouts
that are added once official training begins. The African runners’
foundation is much larger, so they have more room to add these finishing
touches. The second problem is that once Americans start training, we
take the opposite approach and try to add the finishing touches before
developing the foundation. This is often seen in Junior High or even High
School track where the focus is on specific interval training with little
attention paid to developing a general endurance or speed base. Let’s look
at exactly how a runner should develop in terms of mileage, intensity,
density, training distribution, and focus.
The mileage question is always the first to be asked. The answer is
that it depends on the person and their event, but some overarching
principles remain. Total volume should be progressively increased
throughout a runner’s career until he reaches the point that is necessary for
maximizing his potential in that event. How long it takes depends on the
goal event, but for most non-marathon runners max mileage can be
progressed to within 5-7yrs of beginning serious training.
 
Maximum mileage needs for event specialist (low end is for FT
athletes, high end for ST):
However, there comes a point where mileage is counterproductive.
Once a large volume of training has been done there will be diminishing
returns, and the same amount is no longer needed to maintain the
stimulus. In addition, more and more of the training will be shifting from
general to more specific. Thus, a mileage drop is needed. This once again
depends on the goals of the athlete, but once an athlete hits his peak
--- PAGE 406 ---
mileage, a drop in mileage can occur the next season or mileage can be
kept constant for a year or two before that drop occurs. For master’s
athletes this is of particular importance. Master’s athletes should cut back
on their mileage levels due to changes in how they recover.
The next idea is how does intensity and focus change throughout the
years. Beginning runners should focus on the extremes and have a much
higher percentage of general training. The goal should be to gradually
increase the amount of general aerobic running they are doing and perfect
their general speed. Other types of work can be done but it should be low
volume and low stress. By approaching it this way, the runners will
develop a large aerobic system, gradually adapt their musculoskeletal
system for the demands of running, and impart neuromuscular
development and good biomechanics through pure speed training. Or
simply put, the first couple of years should be spent on laying a
foundation on which to develop a better runner.
As athletes progress, the percentage of their training devoted to
general training should decrease as more emphasis should be put first on
support paces and later on specific paces. During the time period when the
runner is shooting for his best performances (i.e., post collegiate 25-34yrs
or so for pro runners), the emphasis should be on specific training with
slightly reduced mileage to allow for this. As athletes get older, more
emphasis is needed on pure speed training, as speed losses with older
endurance athletes are common. To help combat this, speed and strength
training designed to maintain strength levels, Fast Twitch fiber numbers,
and neural recruitment is a necessity.
Lastly is the concept of density. Density refers to how much
intensity can be handled within a period of time. A common measurement
is how many intense workouts can be done per week. Surprisingly,
younger athletes with their superior recoverability can handle higher
levels of density. That does not mean that they necessarily need it though.
During the early post-collegiate years, density should probably be highest
since a large base has already been established yet the athletes are young
enough to still recover well. In general density should decrease as one
ages and loses the ability to bounce back and recover as quickly.
 
--- PAGE 407 ---
Within Season Periodization
The next step is looking at how to plan training for one season.
While the basic ideas of periodization have been mentioned before, an in
depth look is needed. With older models of periodization you basically
had one training period focused on one training goal, and the subsequent
period focused on an entirely different goal. An example would be a base
period focused on aerobic running, followed by a threshold period, then
VO2max, then a speed phase.
Unlike this traditional model, in the following method there is rarely
a period of training where only one or two types of work are done. The
only exceptions are when coming back from a break post season or
coming back from a long layoff. Instead, during each training period, the
vast majority of the training components are included; the only thing that
changes is their emphasis. The result is that peak fitness is never
incredibly far away like in the traditional model, and also peak racing can
be sustained for a longer time period. This is a necessity in modern track
and road racing as athletes no longer plan for just one big race per year but
have many important competitions scattered throughout.
The training periods can be broken down into a base phase where
general training is emphasized, a pre-competition phase where support
training is emphasized, and a competition phase where specific training is
emphasized. While I am breaking down the season into phases for the
purpose of easy conceptualization, in reality they are really blends; they
are not distinct and abrupt phases but rather blend into each other.
 
Base Period
During the base period, the emphasis is on developing the
foundation for all subsequent training. The goal is to establish all the
necessary components but not to start putting them together yet. This
means creating not only an aerobic base but also a musculoskeletal base
and a neuromuscular base. This means that general endurance and speed
training are emphasized while specific and support intensities are
introduced.
--- PAGE 408 ---
For developing general endurance, the important part is duration,
not necessarily intensity. The goal should be to increase total mileage and
duration of work to appropriate levels. Contrary to popular dogma, the
10% rule of increasing mileage has little value. The rule of thumb is that
mileage can be progressively increased rather rapidly up to the amount
that the runner has successfully maintained in the past. For experienced
runners coming off a layoff, this could mean a jump from not running to
70mpw in 2-3 weeks. Where mileage increases are a concern is when
venturing into new territory. When increasing mileage to a level above
this, it is best to add one mile per day to your running. The goal for
mileage during the base period is to progressively increase to maximum
level for the season.
The long run also should be progressively increased to its maximum
duration during this phase. Once the long run reaches its maximum length,
then intensity or add-ons should be considered. For most event groups
aerobic support training should be gradually introduced after an initial 2-4
week period of mostly mileage and general speed. Initially this could be
introduced as pickups or gradual progressions. As the athletes progress,
the introduction of Lactate Threshold (LT) runs should be done for the
majority of events. These should be progressively increased during the
latter base phase and continue through to the early pre-competition phases.
General speed would start with strides first to get the runner neurally
and biomechanically ready for faster work. Following a week of this,
runners can then include hill sprints initially, eventually progressing to flat
sprints or some combination of each. Towards the latter end of the base
phase, anaerobic support or, for shorter events, speed endurance is
introduced. It is done mostly in the form of add-ons or combo work.
While general endurance and speed are emphasized, small spices or
introductions of specific work should be included. For the majority of
events, this will be something as simple as strides or surges during a
distance run, but during the latter base phase this could include some
rhythm work.
Lastly, during the latter parts of the phase, transition into the pre-
competition period should be done with small spices of aerobic/anaerobic
and direct support thrown in. This is usually done in the form of some sort
of add-on or combo work depending on what the support paces are. For
--- PAGE 409 ---
example, a LT run might be cut down by 10min in length but have a 5min
segment at aerobic support pace added on.
 
 
Pre-Competition Phase
The pre-competition phase represents a transition in emphasis to
support paces. The goal of this phase is to start to bring together and
assemble the components built up during the base phase. The amount of
general endurance training will decrease to maintenance levels. What this
means is that for most events, mileage is reduced slightly and the longer
high end aerobic training is reduced to maintenance levels. The long run,
unless it is of central importance to the event, is used as a maintenance
tool for general endurance. That means that additions to it are limited and
most of the time it serves as a long easy run. The exception is that it can
occasionally be turned into a long steady or progressive run for
maintaining high-end aerobic general endurance.
 The early part of the pre-competition phase consists of carrying on
the aerobic support work introduced during the base phase and
transitioning that to direct support work. Transition can occur in the form
of alternations getting faster, blending workout, or combo workouts. On
the speed side, for shorter events speed endurance should be maintained
early on and transition to direct speed support. For longer events, pure
speed goes into maintenance mode with it being done maybe once every 2
weeks depending on the goal. Lastly, during this phase the specific
endurance progression should be introduced. The goal is to take the
introduction or maintenance specific work done during the base phase and
start to progress it towards the end goal during the last part of the specific
period.
 
Competition Phase
The Competition phase is all about having all of the components
assembled and simply shining them up to operate at peak performance.
The general endurance and mileage drop slightly. More importantly,
because of the increase in intensity, the density of training has to be
manipulated. Density should decrease due to the higher level of emphasis
--- PAGE 410 ---
put on specific workouts. That means more recovery training and more
time between intense sessions.
The goal during this phase is to do everything to enhance specific
endurance and specific speed endurance. The progression of specific
endurance is continued with a new workout every 10-14 days. This is
accompanied by some blend work introduced to combine the specific pace
with direct speed so that specific speed endurance is increased. This is
important because it enhances the ability to finish off a strong pace. Direct
and aerobic/anaerobic support are relegated to maintenance duty and often
used as a combination workout. These are general guidelines for
periodization; specifics for each event are covered in their chapters.
 
Lengths of Phases
To determine the lengths of phases first start with your peak
workout and work backwards to determine how much time you have. The
lengths of each phase will depend on the level of the athlete, the type of
athlete, and the goals. Slow Twitch athletes can hold peaks longer than FT
athletes so that should be taken into account. Additionally, the base built
determines how much specific work can be done. The greater the general
foundation is the more specific work can be done. Lastly, the lifetime
fitness of an athlete plays a role. As a rule, the more lifetime training
volume underneath their belts, the less time is needed during the general
period.
Certain phases can be lengthened if needed by introducing what I
call a refresh period. A refresh period refers to a 7-14 day period where the
focus returns to general or support training. This can be strategically
implanted during the specific period to make sure the athlete’s
performance is sustained.
As a guideline, the specific period can last 6-10 weeks, the support
period 4-8 weeks, and the general period 3-8 weeks depending on what
the focus is. These can be shortened and lengthened based on the athlete’s
needs and goals and are not set in stone. It ultimately depends on how
much time is needed to build and progress to where you need to be.
 
Special Training Periods
--- PAGE 411 ---
In addition to the normal training phases and workouts, there are a
couple of different special short periods of training that can be introduced
throughout the training period. The use of these special periods is to shift
the focus to one particular aspect to try and maximize it.
One type of special training phase is what I call a refresh period. A
refresh period is a short period of time (usually 3-10 days) in which the
emphasis is put entirely on one or two training goals that have not been
addressed in a while. The goal is to give a boost to that particular area.
The aerobic refresh period is designed to refresh the athlete aerobically.
This is of particular use in the middle of a long competitive season or
when trying to prolong a peak. During an aerobic refresh, general and
support endurance work is done. On the opposite side is the Anaerobic
Refresh, which is a short period of time when you go back to general
speed or speed endurance work to maintain each or to bring the anaerobic
system to a higher level during a period of de-emphasis. Lastly, a general
refresh period is when general endurance and general speed are given
complete emphasis during a short period of time. As mentioned
previously, refresh periods are very useful in prolonging a peak or in the
middle of a European-like competitive season in which there are frequent
races followed by a gap in racing and then more racing.
Another type of special period is what is called a special block of
training. Used in swimming and by running coaches such as Percy Cerutty
and Renato Canova, it is a very intense short period of time that tries to
take advantage of the supercompensation effect. The period can be as
short as one day, where a double workout is done, or consist of a weekend
of intense training. The blocks should consist of two or more, depending
on their length, hard workouts aimed at different purposes. A commonly
used block is the double workout day where a hard workout is done in the
morning and then another hard workout is done in the afternoon. What
workout to use depends on the training goal, but it is generally best to use
workouts for slightly different goals. One use would be to work on the
direct endurance support in the morning or the direct speed support in the
afternoon. Another possibility is to do a specific workout in the morning
and then a shorter faster workout in the afternoon. In the latter example,
speed endurance when tired would be trained. These blocks are useful to
--- PAGE 412 ---
try to take an athlete to the next level. The key is to take extra rest both
before and after the block.
The takeaway message for both career long and within a season
periodization is that a foundation of general training allows the athlete to
handle more support training, which in turn allows for higher quality and
volume of specific work to be done. The training process is a continual
build with the ultimate process in enhancing specific endurance. If there is
a weak link in the foundation or support structure, then no matter how
much specific endurance training is done, improvement will not be seen.
At that point, the weak link would have to be addressed. That is why we
must return to general and support work periodically throughout the years
to ensure that the foundation is stable enough to build our specific
endurance.
 
Within Days/Weeks Periodization
Bill Bowerman popularized the idea of alternating hard and easy
training. This was a great leap forward in training theory, as it applied the
principle of adaptation, mainly that a stress is needed but adaptation takes
place only with adequate recovery. Two problems with a literal
interpretation of the hard/easy principle, which Bowerman did not even
practice himself, are that it does not mean that the alternation occurs day
after day and that there are intensities between hard and easy.
The first problem is easily solved. The amount of recovery or easy
training after a workout should be directly proportional to how intense or
draining that workout is. That means the harder the workout, the more
recovery needed. Recovery does not mean a day off but rather some level
easy training. The one slight exception to this rule is when doing a special
supercompensation block of training. The rest between double workouts
or a weekend of intensity is purposely  inadequate as we are trying to
accumulate a large stress. However, after the special block, the recovery
deficit needs to be repaid, and the principle holds true.
The second problem is that there are many shades of grey between
easy and hard training. Instead of having a strict strong modulation of hard
and easy days, most programs combine two to three hard workouts per
week, 1-2 medium workouts, and several easy runs. Of course, we are still
--- PAGE 413 ---
classifying using three units, instead of two, but the point is don’t get
caught up in a polarized system of very hard workouts with very slow
running.
While training is usually defined in the week because it is a
common measurement, it’s not necessary. Workouts should ideally be
designed and placed based on when they are needed and how much rest is
needed afterwards, not because Mondays and Thursdays are always
workout days and Sundays are long runs.
In general, most athletes can handle a week that includes 2 hard
workouts and 2 medium workouts with the rest being a combination of
distance runs and recovery runs. An example of such a set up would be
hard workouts such as specific endurance work on Monday and a
Threshold run on Friday. For the medium days, Wednesday could be an
aerobic interval workout such as pace 200’s or hill sprints, while Saturday
would be a long easy run. Sunday would then be a designated recovery
day consisting of only slow recovery running or a day off, while the rest
of the week would be filled with a mix of easy to moderate distance runs
and recovery runs.
 
Singles Versus Doubles
The debate over whether to run once or twice per day is a constant
in the world of running. The singles advocates will point to Lydiard’s
statements of having to keep “prolonged pressure on the heart” and to
successful coaches like Mark Wetmore. The doubles advocates will point
to the Kenyan runners who run two sometimes three times per day
regularly. But what is the answer?
The answer is both are needed. There is a time and a place for
doubles and singles. And no, there is no magic mile per week threshold
that one has to surpass to begin doubles. Low mileage runners sometimes
need doubles just as much as higher mileage runners. The question is
when do we need doubles?
It is common sense to think that one 8mi run is better than two 4mi
runs and that definitely holds true when building general endurance.
During a period of time when the focus is on general aerobic base
building, it makes sense that you want that longer stimulus. That means a
--- PAGE 414 ---
longer single run or doubles where there is one long single run and a
shorter recovery run are most likely the way to go. However, once the
intensity starts to increase and you are no longer running only miles, is it
better to do one 8-10mi or two 4-5mi runs during an easy or distance day?
I think most people automatically assume a single run or a single
longer run plus a shorter recovery run is better. Not many people consider
an even or near even doubles split. I didn’t either, except that I was forced
to do split double runs early on in my career. Due to circumstances at my
High School, we trained twice a day and generally split our mileage right
down the middle. Why did we do this? First off, we had Cross-Country
practice first period, so running in the morning made sense. We also had
after school practice, so it made sense to run again. Second, and perhaps
most importantly, we were restricted to running on our campus, which
meant all running was around a 1.5mi loop. We were all running 60-70-
80mpw at times, so no one wanted to run 8mi straight doing loops, as it
was mind numbing to do that every day. If I go back and look at my logs,
they are littered with days of 4.5/4.5, 5/5, and 6/6 during the school year.
During the summer, when general endurance was being built, it looked
much different, 9/4 or 8/5 mileage splits were the norm.
Fast forward a couple of years, and the High School runners I
coached at the school followed the same approach. I noticed that as long
as we built general endurance in the summer with longer runs and
included a long run every week during the school year, there was no
negative impact on endurance, even though most runs were only 5 miles
in length. Conventional wisdom would expect the aerobic system to be the
one that took the hit if the mileage is split in half, but this has never
happened.
My High School and the athletes I coach are not the only examples
of runners who have done split mileage for easy days. World class
marathoner Kenny Moore’s log is filled with recovery days consisting of
very short doubles of 3 and 3 or 4 and 4. The key was that Kenny was
hitting his workouts every couple days and had a good long run.
This brings us to the key point. Splitting distance days seems to
enhance recovery for most runners once general endurance is built. That
means, longer distance runs are probably best for building general
endurance, but once this is built the emphasis switches. Thus, to maintain
--- PAGE 415 ---
general endurance, the stimulus needed is much lower. That means split
recovery days in combination with a long run on the weekend will be
enough to maintain general endurance, and the split distance days will
enhance recovery.
What happens when you split it with shorter doubles is that it
enhances recovery. The runs are shorter so that the degree of mechanical
and oxidative damage that occurs is kept to a minimum. Second, and
perhaps most importantly, splitting may aid in glycogen replenishment. It
is much easier to restore glycogen stores after an easy 4-5mi run then after
a 10mi run. Yes, you run twice, so you have to replenish glycogen twice,
but I'd argue that it is easier to replenish glycogen twice with several hours
in between. Lastly, running twice may mean that you get a hormonal
release twice in the day, which could improve recovery.
If we look at growth hormone release during easy running, there's a
swift rise initially for the first 30-40min of a run, and then it levels off
significantly to 60min. One study showed an increase of about 550
percent from 0-40min, yet from 40-60min it only went up another 40-
50percent. This is but one example of the hormonal triggers of exercise,
but it provides insight into why split runs may enhance recovery.
 
Doubles=Training in a Depleted State?
The recovery aspects cover short split doubles, but what about
longer doubles that higher mileage runners do, such as 9mi and 7miles.
One theory is that the longer initial run creates a pre-fatigued state for the
second run. While it is reasonable to expect that when doing short doubles
of 4-6miles the runner will be recovered for the second run, when doing a
longer run first, that might not be the case.
Some researchers have suggested that training in a fatigued state
may enhance subsequent adaptations. It has been found that training in a
glycogen depleted state enhances gene transcription of several markers of
training adaptation (Yeo et al., 2008; Hansen et al., 2005). Low muscle
glycogen amplifies the activation of signaling proteins, in particular
AMPK and MAPK. Both of these proteins control adaptations such as
mitochondria biogenesis.
--- PAGE 416 ---
In two studies on training every day versus training twice every
other day, increases in enzyme activity have been more significant in the
twice every other day group. In the study by Hansen, they used knee
extensor exercises with one leg being trained every day and the other
twice every other day (2005). The twice every other day leg group showed
significantly better time till exhaustion at the end of the training, along
with increased enzyme activity.
In the study by Yeo, they compared two different groups using
cycling as the means of training (2008). The groups performed either easy
or interval training, with the once every day group alternating each day
between hard and easy. The twice every other day group performed an
easy ride early, then the interval session. In their study glycogen content,
fat oxidation, and CS and HAD enzyme activity were higher in the twice
every other day group, but performance was equally increased in both
groups.
What these studies and their findings suggest is that occasional
training in a depleted state may lead to increased adaptations. This
shouldn't be surprising if you just understand the basics of training and
adaptation. What you are doing when training is putting a certain amount
of stress on the body. During recovery the body responds to that stress by
increasing its defenses against that stress. So it should not be surprising
that training in a glycogen-depleted state produces more stress than
normal. The body then adapts. The thing to remember is that the
adaptation is specific to the stress and requires recovery. Without recovery,
those adaptations aren't taking place. It's a balancing act.
While this may be thoroughly confusing, the takeaway message is to
include several different kinds of runs using singles, short doubles, and
long doubles. As general guidelines, singles or a double including a longer
segment are much better for building general endurance. Shorter split
doubles are better for enhancing recovery and therefore should be used as
maintenance during pre-competition or competition portions of the season
when intensity is high.
Peaking
Often the hardest part is not just getting in top shape but getting in
top shape on the right day. This art is referred to as peaking. It is referred
--- PAGE 417 ---
to as an art because it is very unscientific and requires good manipulation
of the training. We know that workouts generally take between 7-10 days
at the shortest before we see their benefits. So it would make sense then to
do a hard workout about 10 days out and then just simply rest since we
can’t gain any fitness, right? Not exactly.
The goal of peaking is to allow rest and recovery to invigorate the
runner mentally and physically, while still doing enough work to maintain
fitness and to keep his body from overreacting. This overreacting is often
seen by long distance runners, whose body paradoxically goes into a
hibernation like state as they feel tired, heavy legged, and flat even though
their rest has increased. The cause of this is a concept called muscle
tension, which will be discussed shortly. Given this knowledge, the two
key pieces of information we need to figure out are: 1) how long do we
need before fatigue has dissipated and 2) how much training do we need
to do to prevent this overreaction.
There are two basic approaches to peaking, which I’ll term tapering
and sharpening. Tapering is the classic or research based method. In this
method, total volume is dropped significantly, while intensity is increased
significantly. Sharpening takes the approach of maintaining or only very
slightly dropping total mileage and decreasing the volume of the intense
workouts slightly. Additionally, the density of the training is decreased,
allowing more recovery in between harder sessions. Essentially, in
sharpening, there is only a slight change in the training from the previous
weeks of training, and those changes are mainly reducing the intensity and
density slightly to allow for more recovery.
What type of peaking strategy is used depends on what type of
athlete they are (FT or ST), their psychology, and their event. A FT type
runner generally needs a longer peaking period and responds better to a
classic taper. A ST type runner usually does best with a shorter peaking
period and a sharpening phase. While this generally holds true, the event
being trained for also matters, as does the training they have done to this
point. The taper length and degree is proportional to how difficult the
training has been up until the taper point. If the athlete is barely hanging
on and in a state of barely functional overreaching, they may need a larger
and longer taper than someone who is generally non-fatigued and
handling the training.
--- PAGE 418 ---
Research on tapering with sprinters and more recently with more
endurance type athletes shows that after a dramatic taper there is a shift in
the muscle fiber type. If you remember back to the muscle fiber
continuum chart, a dramatic and longer taper causes a slight shift towards
the FT end of the fibers. This may be beneficial for a FT athlete or
someone training for a shorter event but could be very harmful for a ST
athlete or even a FT athlete training for a longer event. A dramatic taper
for ST/longer distance events can cause a small erosion of the aerobic
abilities, which is not what we want most of the time. In addition a large
taper will alter muscle tension, which will be discussed shortly. For these
reasons, I prefer a short sharpening phase for the majority of runners.
There is less risk, and if done correctly just as high of a reward. The
exception is for select FT athletes or those athletes who seem to be over
trained, which should not happen if training is planned correctly. The
sharpening period should consist of more recovery between intense work
and only a slight drop in volume. For reasons to be discussed, it’s
important to maintain a similar training schedule, meaning don’t suddenly
cut out all doubles if the athlete is used to doubling.
The event also matters as that determines the relative importance of
aerobic or anaerobic abilities. A common mistake is to always use faster
work no matter the event to peak. The problem is that as discussed this
faster work can shift the body to work more anaerobically. For instance, in
peaking for a marathon, the last thing a runner needs is a decent volume of
faster work in the week leading up to the race as that basically sends the
signal to burn glycogen to a higher degree. Similarly, a lot of longer
slower work might not be ideal for most 800m runners.
Lastly, the psychological makeup of the athlete plays a role. Some
runners require the confidence from their recent hard workouts, while
others can be satisfied by the long-term training that they have
accumulated. Be careful in cutting training back to a high degree with
runners who derive confidence from their workouts. The goal with these
type of runners should be to cut back enough to give rest but not so much
that they start to panic about losing fitness. The workouts done during the
sharpening or even tapering phase should have the goal of getting the
athlete to feel right on race day.
 
--- PAGE 419 ---
Muscle Tension
We’ve all experienced a race where we completely fell apart from
the start of the race and felt completely off despite going into the race with
training going well. How does it happen? If I knew exactly, I’d be a
genius, but one thing that plays a large role is muscle tension. It partly
explains why we feel good one day and flat the next. Have you ever
wondered why most coaches have you do strides the day before a race?
Through experience, most have figured out that if you do just a little faster
stuff the day before a race, you feel really good the next day. One of the
reasons is muscle tension.
So, what is this mysterious muscle tension? This might anger some
of the scientist types, but its best to keep things simple. We can get
incredibly complex on explaining what resting muscle tension is and how
it can be altered, but when we do that it loses its practicality in application
to the real world. With that in mind, here’s the useful simplified way to
look at muscle tension.
Within your muscle fibers, there is an optimal length for force
production. This is known as the length-tension relationship, and it varies
considerably based on a lot of factors. So, in simplistic terms if it's 10%
too low, you may only be able to generate 90% force, while if it's 10% too
high, you will generate less force.
Your body controls the resting tension through a variety of
mechanisms, mainly through muscle spindles. If you want an example of
this, go sit on your bed with legs extended for a while. When you get up
and jog around, your quads are tight. Why? Because they've been
shortened for a long time because of the way you were sitting. Similarly,
what happens after you sit in a car or airplane for a while? Your
hamstrings are tight because they’ve been in a shortened position for a
while. Because these muscles have been in a shortened state for a while
the body adjusts the resting tension. These are examples in a passive state,
but it works very similarly in a dynamic state like running.
For running think of it like this, if we do a lot of long slow running
or even a lot of threshold like running, the body is not worried about high
force development, it is worried about efficiency. The length/tension
needed for maximal force development is going to be different than that
--- PAGE 420 ---
needed for a lot of medium force contractions. Your body is amazing at
adapting, so if you do a lot of work where only moderate contractions of
mainly Slow Twitch and a little Fast Twitch-a fibers, then it’s going to
adjust and optimize efficiency for this type of contraction. If you do this
type of training continuously, then one day decide to perform a race that is
much faster (let’s say 1500m pace), you feel flat for that 1500m  because
your muscles are pre-conditioned to be most efficient at a lot of moderate
contractions. . Your tension wasn’t right going into it.
You know how you feel super bouncy or have a pop in your stride or
you feel flat? That’s muscle tension. If you feel super bouncy, your tension
is probably high. If you feel really flat and non-responsive, your tension is
probably low. The last week or so before the big race, you’re not going to
gain any fitness, so why workout and not just rest? Wouldn’t it make sense
to just store up all that energy and be ready to race? Well, if you’ve ever
backed off too much for a race, you know what happens. You feel horribly
flat. The reason is the whole tension relationship was messed up. The last
week is about altering tension, not gaining fitness. It’s about getting a
runner to the line with his muscles in the optimal place.
What’s optimal? It depends completely on the race and the person.
In general, the shorter the event, the higher the tension needed and the
longer the race, lower the tension needed. This only makes sense if we
think it about it logically. Having tension that is for high force might be
great, but is it most efficient for an activity that takes a lot of small
contractions? No. Similarly, with sprint events, having tension that is
optimal for max force may seem like a great idea, but if it’s too high, then
it might take longer to contract, thus resulting in a decrease in power. Not
something we want.
And it is going to vary for each individual. Each individual will
have a different fiber type makeup that will alter his optimal tension. If we
have an individual with a lot of Fast Twitch fibers, he’s probably going to
need to be at a higher tension than someone with a lot of ST fibers, even if
they are running the same race. Here are some simple guidelines for
altering muscle tension, listed from those that will affect it the most down
to the least.
 
--- PAGE 421 ---
Now modifying tension and getting it right on the exact day is a
work of art. It's hard to do. As a coach, you've got to be acutely aware of
how the runner looks and feels. Look at their stride to see how responsive
it is and ask the runners how it feels. To what degree you alter tension
depends on how far out you are from the competition. What I’ve found
works best is if big changes are needed in altering tension, go for changes
further out from the race, then as the days get closer, go for small/tweaking
changes. This generally works much better than waiting till the day before
to try to make big changes in tension.
 
In looking at training there are a few options:
1.     Increase tension dramatically- Sprints or hill sprints for example.
2.     Increase tension slightly- ex: 8x200 at 2mi down to 1mi pace
3.     Tension is good-maintain- either do race pace work, or blend work
that has athletes do some moderate running and some fast running (ex:
fartlek with 5min moderate segments to start and end with 10sec
segments fast)
4.     Decrease tension slightly- short threshold run
5.     Decrease tension dramatically- long run or long threshold run
 
What you do depends on what the athlete needs and how far out you
are from a race. As I said, go for big changes far out (3-7days) and small
changes closer. If big changes are needed closer to a race, know how an
athlete reacts to certain types of training. For example, he might get sore
from flat sprints so while that may raise tension, it makes him sore so it’s
useless. Generally with distance runners, you’ll almost never use option 5,
--- PAGE 422 ---
unless it’s for a marathon. Below I’ll give you some examples of how this
works:
If it's Monday and an athlete is crazy bouncy, well, you might do
something that slightly lowers tension (i.e., a short threshold run) then
come back Wednesday or Thursday with some short pace work, such as
200s at 3200 down to mile pace. The threshold run lowers tension, then
later in the week, the pace work maintains tension or prevents the
continued lowering from the threshold work combined with easy distance
running.
If it's Tuesday or Wednesday and they look pretty good, you might
just do something to maintain tension. A combo workout is a great idea in
these circumstances. My favorite is 5min medium, 5 easy, 5 medium, 5
easy, 5min of 10sec sprint 50sec easy. Then do strides the day before to
raise tension a little and you’re good. If it's early in the week and they
look flat, then faster work or sprints should be done. You have to be
careful with sprints because if they haven’t done them in a while they'll
get sore, so that would take away from the purpose.
Generally with true distance runners it's about raising tension
because the mileage we do keeps it pretty low. Middle distance runners
are a little trickier. Tension should also play a role in the pace of the
strides done the day before a race.
I'll give you an example of when I nailed it with one of my top
runners, Ryan. Going into the Nike regional meet, Ryan was feeling flat
on that Sunday and Monday. So, the only workout we did was Tuesday. A
mile in 4:33 on trails, then 5x 8-10sec hill sprints. The mile was just there
to get some confidence and keep the body reminded of what it feels like to
work pretty good and get out fast and relaxed. The real key was the hill
sprints, which consisted of just 40-50 seconds of total work. But they alter
tension a lot. Come Saturday, his legs felt great, and he had his best race
of the year, winning regionals and advancing to nationals where he ended
up 12th. Now if only it was always that easy.
To offer a summary of the peaking process before a major race, first
do your last hard specific workout between 14 and 10 days out from the
race. Around 7 days out a moderately intense or a low volume intense
workout can be done. The key is to keep the volume low so that tension
changes aren’t enormous and delayed fatigue isn’t likely. Within a week of
--- PAGE 423 ---
the performance, the goal should be to manipulate muscle tension to get
the athlete feeling right on race day.
As far as mileage goes, do enough that they do not feel flat, as large
drops in mileage also alter tension. For the majority of runners, it is best
not to make drastic changes in their routine. For FT athletes, they respond
better to bigger tapers than ST athletes, so that is another factor to
consider. The bottom line is that peaking is an art form and an individual
process. Find what works best for your runners.
 
How to race in Europe (or peaking when
racing several times a week)
I always wondered how the professional runners who seemed to
race several times per week at times maintained peak fitness when racing
on the European track circuit. I finally got to witness some of the different
approaches when coaching professionals who competed on the European
circuit. What I found is that it can be applied to runners of all levels.
The key is doing just enough to get by and no more. Because of the
frequency of racing, the races themselves also act as the toughest specific
track workout of the week. That means, the in between time is spent
almost entirely doing maintenance and rhythm work. The workout volume
is kept low, and the intensity depends entirely on how much time is
separated between races. The longer the time period, the more intense or
“normal” the workout is. For the most part, race pace 200s, 300s, and 400s
maintenance style are the staples, with an occasional longer interval done
to keep the feeling of a sustained effort. If there is a larger gap between
races, then some “refresh” training is often done. Full workouts at a
variety of intensities that haven’t been touched upon in a while are
refreshed.
How does this apply to others? In particular, High School runners
often have to race several times per week or even have 4 important races
in a row every weekend; take the European racing season approach. Do
enough to maintain what you have built up and stop trying to squeeze in
another workout here or there. Instead, cut the volume of your typical
workouts to a maintenance level and let the racing take care of itself.
--- PAGE 424 ---
 
--- PAGE 425 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 426 ---
Finalizing the Plan
While each coach has their separate method to the madness, here is
how I go about setting up the training plan on paper.
1.     Get a calendar showing the entire training period.
2.     Identify the peak race.
3.     Fill in known races.
4.     Design your big key workouts for specific, supports, general, pure
speed, etc.
5.     Design the progressions of workouts to reach that key workout for
each category
a.     This takes skill as you need to know how long you are taking
to develop each attribute and how often you want to do a
workout that focuses on that attribute.
6.     Design maintenance workouts for each category to be used once its
emphasis is decreased.
7.     Decide how to transition and connect (blends) each category.
8.     Next, look at the calendar and decide roughly where the base, pre-
comp, and competition phases lie.
9.     Starting 10-14 days out, start with final specific endurance workout
and work back to the beginning placing a specific workout roughly
every 2 weeks (10-20 day range is normal)
10.  Insert any special blocks (such as aerobic refresh) of training
11.  Using the training periods (base, pre-comp, competition), insert your
key general training workouts at the end of the base phase, your key
aerobic/anaerobic support in the middle of the pre-competition, the key
direct support workout at the end of the pre-competition, and the
specific work has already been taken care of.
12.  Once these key workouts have been set, working backwards, insert the
progressions that get you to these key workouts. For direct supports, a
new workout every 10-14 days is generally the guideline, while
aerobic/anaerobic supports and pure speed training can occur more
frequently (on avg. every 7-14 days).
--- PAGE 427 ---
13.  Following the key workouts, insert the maintenance workouts every 2-
4 weeks depending on the type.
14.  Fill in any workouts designed for a special reason (i.e., kick
development, strength endurance, etc.)
15.  Fill in the medium training days
16.  Determine easy days/mileage.
17.  This is the guiding plan! Be prepared to rip it apart and adjust along
the way.
--- PAGE 428 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 430 ---
20

--- PAGE 431 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 432 ---
Training for Each Event
“To coach a top athlete you need to be an explorer. An explorer,
because always you must discover something new. When you suppose that
you feel protected with what you already know, you no longer have the
possibility to overtake your limits.” Renato Canova
 
After making it this far, it is finally time to go through the details of
training for each event. In the following sections, we will go from the base
phase to peak race with workout examples, progression of workouts, and
sample training plans for each group. While I’ll provide the framework, it
is important to remember the one principle that should be ingrained in you
by this point, individualization. I’ll take you through the training for the
event as a specialist, or someone who’s right in the middle in terms of Fast
Twitch versus Slow Twitch. It’s your job to use the concepts and
suggestions found in the individualization chapter to put the final touches
on the training.
 
800m
The 800m is an event where the difference between the runner
coming at it from the speed side and the runner coming at it from the
endurance side is drastically different. It almost requires two entirely
different methods of training. That makes it difficult to come up with one
streamlined specialist way to train for the 800m, so I strongly advise you
to go back and look at the Individualization chapter in regards to the
800m.
 
Endurance Side Development
The 800m runner’s endurance training differs from most other event
groups. Unlike other events, normal easy, steady, or moderate running is
very far away from 800m specificity. That does not mean that it is not
important, it just means different and unique ways of developing general
endurance are required.
The 800m runner needs a solid base of mileage and a moderate long
run (9-12miles for most). The total amounts of each depend on the type of
--- PAGE 433 ---
runner he is, as a FT runner can get away with moderate mileage in the
40-50 range, while a ST 800m runner needs top peak in the 70-80mpw
range. As far as general endurance development for FT type of runners,
the 800m runner should do very limited amounts of LT work as it will
decrease his anaerobic abilities. During their distance runs, more “stuff”
should be added instead of only long, consistent distance runs. The
frequent inclusion of strides, surges, and moderate pickups/progressions
are a necessity.
During the base phase, an 800m runner should focus on easy
progression runs and aerobic intervals. The aerobic intervals, particularly
for a FT runner, work to increase general endurance at a pace much closer
to specificity. During the early base phase, simple fartleks of short 30sec-
2min fartlek intervals at 10k pace will suffice. These should progressively
increase in length and increase in pace down to 5k pace as the base
proceeds. These can eventually be turned into full interval sessions during
the pre-competition phase at 10k-5k paces but longer rest periods and
shorter intervals should be used than for the same sessions with longer
distance runners. Similarly, shorter aerobic intervals, such as 100-150m
repeats at 3k down to mile pace with short rest between reps and long rest
between sets work well to transition to support work as you get closer to
the pre-competition phase.
As mentioned already, the early pre-competition phase for the
endurance side of things should focus on 5k-10k pace workouts and
aerobic intervals. In addition combo workouts involving a step down in
paces from LT to 3k can be used. During the latter part of the pre-
competition phase, the short aerobic intervals can be lengthened to 200-
800m intervals at 3k down to 1mile pace for support. Additionally, combo
and blend workouts should be implemented that combine the speed and
endurance supports. In this way, a blend workout would focus on longer
segments at 3k-1mile pace with a few shorter segments at 800m pace
thrown in. These blend workouts will go a long way towards ensuring the
800m runner has the necessary endurance at specific paces.
 
Speed Side Development
--- PAGE 434 ---
Speed is vital for a good 800m runner. For this reason, a lot of
importance is given during the base phase in developing first speed and
then, during the pre-competition phase, speed endurance. Initially, hill
sprints are used as a way to develop speed and strength. These should be
progressively increased in number until they get to around 10 total. Hill
sprints can be done once or even twice per week for 800m runners. Once
this occurs, the transition to flat sprints is made. Flat sprints should be
started with shorter 60m lengths and increased to 100m. For the majority
of 800m runners, doing one session of flat sprints per week is enough, but
for some FT runners or those emphasizing speed development, another set
of hill sprints can be added on some weeks. During this phase it is best to
not get caught doing solely flat sprints every week. Once every 2-3 weeks,
switch these for hill sprints to give the athlete a different stimulus and a
break from the monotony.
The next step should occur during the pre-competition phase and is
speed endurance, which includes at first adding on one to two longer
segments of 20-25sec after a hill sprint session. The next step is to add one
or two 120-150m segments after a reduced flat sprint session. Finally,
progress in such a way that the ratio of speed endurance to pure speed tips
in the favor of speed endurance, with the segment lengths getting
gradually longer. In the final stages of the pre-competition phase the speed
endurance work can shift towards 400m pace work as the segment lengths
get above 200m. During the competition phase, especially for a FT runner,
some full 400m +/- pace work should be done. Keep the volume low and
the rest periods between such work very high. For most 800m runners,
this type of work only needs to be done once every 2-4 weeks.
 
Specific Development
Initial specific work during the base phase should consist of strides
or short segments. The specific progression should begin during the pre-
competition phase. It is best to start with very short segments for the 800m
runner. For FT runners, the segments should be broken into low volume
sets equaling around 800m worth of work. An example of a starting
workout would be 2-3 sets of 8x100m at 800m pace with 1 minute rest.
From here, increase the segment lengths gradually, keeping the set volume
--- PAGE 435 ---
around the same. Manipulation of the recovery or the order of the longer
reps (such as in the case of sets of 600/200m or 200/600m) are ways to
progress and adapt this workout.
The last step is specific speed endurance, in which workouts slightly
faster than 800m pace are done, or mixing 800m pace and slightly faster is
used in blend or combo workouts. Specific speed endurance is often the
deciding factor in the 800m, as the last 200m of the 800m is decided not
by who has the best kick but who slows down the least. One way to do
this in a combo fashion with the specific endurance work mentioned
above is to change the last segment of each set to be done at a faster
speed. This is a great way for not only 800m runners but all event groups
to develop specific speed endurance. Another option is to develop high
intensity strength endurance, which is mentioned in the chapter on
Workouts for Specific Reasons.
 
Maintenance
General endurance should be maintained with aerobic
intervals/fartleks and combo work. Easy additions to distance runs can
also serve this purpose with progressions, pickups, and surges. Speed
should be maintained more frequently than with other events, particularly
for FT runners. The addition of short sprints or hill sprints after distance
runs or other workouts is one way to go about it. Specific endurance
during the base phase or during peaking phases can be maintained via
short specific intervals and rhythm work. 100-300m repeats with
relatively long rest are one example.
 
See appendix for examples/progressions for each workout type.
 
--- PAGE 438 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
1,500m/ 1mile
The 1,500m or mile is the classic track event. Whenever a non-
runner asks about your running, the question of “what’s your mile time?”
seemingly always pops up. The mile represents an event that requires very
high levels of speed and endurance to be successful at it, not to mention a
high tolerance to pain. Due to this, more than any other event it requires a
balance of both sides of the spectrum to reach peak performance.
--- PAGE 439 ---
 
Endurance Side Development
Like with all events the first step is a short (~2 weeks) introductory
period that includes only mileage and strides. After this, the base phase of
training starts. As always, the emphasis is on general endurance and
general speed.
Mileage and long runs are of varying importance depending on
where the runner falls on the classification scale. For either group, mileage
should reach its maximum at the end of the base phase with a small
decline and leveling off for ST type runners and a more drastic decline as
the training progresses for FT runners. The long run should increase
reaching a moderate length of 12-17 miles (depending on the runner type)
during the base phase and should be used solely as maintenance after that.
For the FT runner, no add-ons should be included in the long run, while
the ST runner can do easy add-ons of limited volume.
Since general endurance is best developed through high-end aerobic
running at marathon to threshold pace, that is the emphasis throughout the
base period. ST runners in particular should do a high amount of marathon
pace (MP) and LT running. To start with progression runs working down
from a steady pace through MP to LT should be done. These should be
rather informal at first and develop into structured LT workouts. LT
workouts can be done once per week during the base phase with the goal
of slowly increasing the time spent at LT. Start with around 15min total
time spent at LT and progress upward to around 30min. Once this level is
reached, adding in faster work at 10k pace will serve as a transition to
support training or adding in hill sprints or moderate hill repeats at the end
can develop strength endurance.
As explained in the individualization chapter, FT runners should
limit the amount of running done at LT and instead should develop general
endurance through progression runs, fartleks at just faster than threshold,
and aerobic intervals. Aerobic intervals should be done during the base
phase and consist of short (30-90sec) bouts of running at 3k-10k pace with
equal or more jogging rest in between. These aerobic intervals can be
lengthened during the pre-competition phase to serve as aerobic support
and direct aerobic support. Following the base phase, general endurance
--- PAGE 440 ---
should be reduced to maintenance through fartleks, short thresholds,
aerobic intervals, combo and blend workouts.
During the pre-competition phase, on the endurance side, aerobic
intervals should be lengthened to form full-blown support workouts at 10k
down to 5k speeds. On the endurance spectrum, the transitioning of the LT
work to fartleks or intervals at 10k pace initially and 5k pace later should
continue. Alternations using 5k-10k pace are an excellent way to develop
aerobic and direct endurance support for the ST miler.
During the latter pre-competition phase, the support should start
shifting towards faster work including 5k down to 3k pace. This can be
done in any number of ways using any of the different workouts. Blend
workouts, in particular mixed blend sessions, are particularly useful as a
way to develop support. An example of a mixed blend workout would be:
1000, 500, 800, 400, 600, 300 with the three longer segments being run at
progressively faster paces (10k, 5k, 3k) and the same with the shorter
segments (3k, 1mi, 800). Workouts like this are a great way to bring
together the supports on the speed and endurance side. As the training
phase progresses, this workout can be progressed via bringing together of
the paces toward 1,500m pace from the speed and endurance side.
 
Speed Side Development
Speed plays a much larger role in the 1,500m than in longer events.
For this reason, greater emphasis is given to developing general speed and
in maintaining speed during the base phase. Speed development should
begin early in the base phase through short hill sprints. As these are
progressively lengthened, flat sprints should be introduced. Unlike with
longer events, milers can move almost entirely to flat sprints at this point.
Flat sprints should be increased up to 100m in length by the end of the
base phase. From here, most milers will need at least some speed
endurance training. For ST milers, keep the total volume limited to adding
a handful of speed endurance segments at the of a general speed session.
For FT type runners, whole sessions of speed endurance can be done.
These sessions should start out with 120m sprints and progressively
increase to 200 to 250m sprints. Only the FT type runners need to progress
to 250m sprints. The total volume should be kept moderate to low (400-
--- PAGE 441 ---
800m of total work is a good guideline). This speed endurance work
should be started at the end of the base phase and continued into the early
pre-competition phase. When speed or speed endurance is emphasized, it
should be performed once per week.
In addition to pure speed endurance, a maintenance level of speed
support work should be done during the base phase. This initially can be
strides before or after runs or workouts. During the pre-competition phase
low volume amounts of speed support should be done in the form of 800m
pace +/- running. A good way to accomplish this is to take the rhythm
200’s done during the base phase and start progressively increasing their
speed down to 800m pace. At first start with just the last one or two
intervals and increase this until the majority of the workout is done at 800
pace by the end of the pre-competition phase. Additionally, as mentioned
earlier, the use of blend workouts of both endurance and speed support
paces works well during the pre-competition phase.
During the competition phase, sprint and general speed work is in
maintenance mode, while specific speed endurance is emphasized.
Specific speed endurance should include the combining and/or blending of
race pace speeds with work faster than race pace. This can be done in the
form of combo, blend, or progression intervals. The goal should be to mix
mile and 800m pace together in workouts to increase specific speed
endurance.
 
Specific Development
Race rhythm is incredibly important for mile runners. To establish
this race rhythm early and to start on the development of specific
endurance, aerobic intervals or rhythm work at 3k to mile pace should be
done in the forms of 100-200m repeats with longer rests (200m jogs for
example) during the base phase.
The official progress of specific work should start during the pre-
competition phase using one of the specific development methods. For
milers, combining the top down and bottom up method usually works
well. Alternations for specific development, such as Oregon’s famous
30/40 workout (alternating a 30sec 200 and a 40sec 200m) are best used
as final touch ups on specific endurance, not necessarily in creating it.
--- PAGE 442 ---
In addition, as mentioned already, blend workouts are a good way to
bring together the support paces to form specific endurance. The last
specific endurance session can be a time trial or longer repeats. With the
majority of specific work for a mile, the repeat length is relatively short
(600m or shorter), so sometimes it helps to top off specific endurance with
a low number of longer repeats at mile pace. An example would be to run
a 1,000 or 1,200m time trial at race pace followed by some short 200’s.
Another possible workout would be 2-3x800 with 3-4min rest between at
mile race pace. These longer specific intervals are very intense, so plenty
of recovery before and after should be given.
The ability to finish strong in the mile is paramount to success. For
this reason, the kick development workouts described in the chapter on
workouts for a specific reason can be used. Additionally, specific speed
endurance should be developed during the competition phase. FT runners
will need a greater amount of this type of work then ST runners. This is
best accomplished through combo or blend workouts consisting of
combining mile pace and work slightly faster. Very short alternations, with
100m segments for example, are good for developing specific speed
endurance. In this case, the fast segment should be just faster than mile
pace, and the slow segment should be around 5k-10k pace. An example
for a 4-minute miler, would be to alternate 13.5-14sec 100’s with 17-18sec
100s for 800m then take a rest and do it again.
 
Maintenance
For the 1,500/mile runner, endurance maintenance work can be done
through combo work. Periodically include combo work that focuses on
threshold, 10k, and 5k paces. A good way to do this is through longer
fartleks or combo workouts. Additionally, the long run and occasional
moderate tempo runs can serve to maintain general endurance for the ST
runner.
On the speed side, pure speed can be maintained with hill sprints or
flat sprints done every 2-4 weeks either as a separate workout or tacked on
to the end of another workout. Oftentimes combining general endurance
and general speed maintenance into one workout is a good idea. Speed
support can be maintained through blend workouts or simple rhythm
--- PAGE 443 ---
workouts such as 100s-200s at 800m paces with a 200-400m jog in
between. During the pace phase, maintenance specific work can be done
in the form of surges, aerobic intervals, or rhythm work.
 
See appendix for examples/progressions for each workout type.
 
 
--- PAGE 446 ---
 
 
 
 
5,000m
The 5k is a unique event that can be approached from the endurance
or speed side. Throughout history endurance type 1,500m runners and 5k
runners who could also run the 10k have done equally well in this event.
The two prime examples for 1,500m types who have excelled at the
1,500m are 2004 Olympic 1,500m and 5,000m Champion Hicham El
Guerrouj and double world champion in the 1,500 and 5k Bernard Lagat.
--- PAGE 447 ---
On the other side of the coin, there are examples of world record holders
and Olympic gold medalists Haile Gebrselassie and Kenenisa Bekele who
dominated both the 5k and 10k. The 5k represents probably the most
commonly targeted event, as it is a staple distance in road racing, High
School Cross Country, and on the track.
 
Endurance Side Development
General endurance is developed through a number of different ways
for a 5k runner. The most important ones are through total mileage, long
runs, and high-end aerobic tempo/threshold running. Mileage should
steadily increase throughout the base phase, hitting its maximum at the
very end of this period. From there, a slight reduction by 10-20% should
gradually occur until a comfortable steady level is maintained all the way
through the specific period with short drops preceding major races.
The long run follows a similar pattern to mileage. The early focus
should be on accumulating distance and worrying about intensity later. For
this reason, the first 4-5 weeks of the base phase should be focused solely
on increasing the length of the long run. It is best to do this very gradually
by perhaps a mile per long run. After this, “stuff” is added on. That means
including at first strides, then surges, and finally pickups at the end. For a
5k runner, the long run is not a main priority, so the add-ons should be
moderate, culminating in at most a 10-15min pickup for the majority of
runners. Typically during the late base phase a pattern of two long runs
with add-ons, one easy long run without, works well. During the early pre-
competition phase this pattern should be reversed and by the end of the
pre-competition, add-ons should be eliminated from the long run as its
sole purpose is maintenance of general endurance from there on out.
High-end aerobic running can serve both as general endurance and
aerobic support for the 5k, depending on the pace. Early on this should be
done in the form of natural progression runs down to marathon pace.
Midway through the base period, these should be replaced with threshold
runs. Threshold runs should start at 15-20min of total time and
progressively increase until a maximum of around 30-35min total. Once
that level is reached, then threshold lengths can be reduced and turned into
--- PAGE 448 ---
combo workouts with short segments at 10k pace added if the goal is to
transition to direct support work.
In addition, a longer marathon paced or steady/hard run should be
done at the end of the base period. This serves as a great feedback tool to
tell if the runners’ general endurance levels are high enough or if more
work needs to be done. The run should be between 7-10 miles and can
replace the long run. This will give a good indication of where to go at the
end of the base phase.
Moving down to support paces initial direct support work can be
done as 10k paced fartleks, alternations, traditional intervals, or my
favorite choice blends. The best early option is fartlek work because it
promotes running by feel, which makes it an easier transition to slightly
faster workouts. Alternating 10k and threshold pace is a great way to
transition from aerobic support to direct support, and can later be
progressed to a specific alternation (by increasing the speed of the faster
segment to 5k pace).
My favorite though is blend workouts. By doing blend workouts
with longer segments at 10k pace and shorter segments at 3k pace, it is a
great way to get work done at both direct supports (speed and endurance
side). Additionally, the paces of the longer segments can be gradually
increased to turn it into a specific or specific speed endurance session.
Lastly, from the endurance side of things, strength endurance plays a
large role for the 5k. See the chapter on workouts designed for a specific
purpose for more information. For strength endurance development, long
runs serve the early foundation. During the base phase hill circuits can be
done. As we get into the pre-competition phase, inserting hill sprints in
between sets of direct support or blend workouts will do the job. Finally,
during the specific period, hill sprints between sets of specific work or the
addition of long hill repeats will finish off the development of strength
endurance.
 
Speed Side Development
From the speed of things, the first step is hill sprints. These will
develop general speed and provide our multifaceted base. Start out with a
low number (4-5) and progress upwards each week until 8-10 is reached.
--- PAGE 449 ---
Once this goal is accomplished, it’s time to convert that speed to flat sprint
speed. Every other week perform flat sprints instead of hill sprints,
starting with 60m sprints and progressing to 100m. From here speed
endurance can be developed through combo work by adding on longer
sprints to hill or flat sprints. Not much of this is needed unless it is a very
FT type runner.
Speed should also be maintained with strides and surges throughout
the training. During the pre-competition phase, some short work at
1600m-3k pace should be included. For a 5k runner, this isn’t meant to be
an intense “anaerobic” workout but instead as a simple neural and
biomechanical introduction to faster work. 100-400m repeats with plenty
of recovery work well in this case. During the later pre-competition phase,
starting to blend this 3k-1600m pace with 5k pace work is a good idea. It
will create specific speed endurance and the ability to surge if done within
the repeat itself.
 
Specific Development
Specific work should be done in the base phase as strides and
surges. The inclusion of 30-60sec surges during the base phase serve as a
great specific work introduction and can later be transformed into the
more formalized aerobic intervals, such as cruise 200’s. The first real
specific workout should begin during the early pre-competition phase, and
depending on your specific endurance development choice, it should
consist of relatively small spurts of specific paces. These can be in the
form of alternations such as 200m at 5k pace and 600m at a steady pace
for 4 miles, or it can be done in the form of short intervals, such as 400’s
at 5k pace with short rest between reps and long rest between sets. Either
way, progress the specific workouts upwards in terms of specificity every
10-15 days, and slightly more frequently during the specific period. For
the 5k, it is best to come at it from several different ways, so my
suggestion is to use several different methods, alternating each method
type.
Lastly, specific work can benefit during the competition period by
including blend work. Blend work is a great way to progress from the
supports to the specific training. For 5k runners, blend work can often
--- PAGE 450 ---
serve as a finishing touch when done in a way that promotes specific
speed endurance. By combining longer segments at race pace with shorter
segments at 3k or faster paces, you develop speed endurance at race pace.
To finalize race preparation, use blend type workouts where the pace
blending occurs within each repeat itself. This teaches the ability to
accelerate off of race pace and can be done with workouts such as 4x600m
repeats with the first 400m of each 600m at 5k pace and the last 200m a
progressive kick down to 3k or 1 mile pace.
 
Maintenance
For the 5k runner, endurance maintenance work can be done
through combo work. Periodically include combo work that focuses on
marathon pace, threshold pace, and 10k pace. A good way to do this is
through longer fartleks or combo threshold workouts. In addition, shorter
marathon pace runs in the 5mi range do a good job of maintaining general
aerobic endurance.
On the speed side, pure speed can be maintained with hill sprints
done every 2-4 weeks and some faster strides. Speed support paces can be
maintained through blend workouts or simple rhythm workouts such as
300s or 200s at 3k and mile paces with a 200-400m jog in between.
Finally, put it all together. Below is a full training cycle for a 5k runner:
 
See appendix for examples/progressions for each workout type.
--- PAGE 453 ---
 
 
 
 
 
10,000m
The 10k is an event that requires a very high level of endurance, but
to be competitive at the elite level, it also requires the ability to change
gears off of fast paces. In the past, longer distance runners were simply
told to run a very high amount of mileage and then top it off with some
interval training. With the top 10k runners and even marathoners, being
competitive all the way down to the 1,500m, times have changed. A
--- PAGE 454 ---
combination of speed, endurance, and strength endurance are required for
maximum performance.
 
Endurance Side Development
The foundation for good 10k racing is a highly developed aerobic
system. The long run and total mileage play large roles in establishing
general endurance. As with all events, mileage should be progressively
increased to maximum by the end of the base period. For ST 10k runners,
the mileage should stay relatively constant with only a small drop of 10%
or less during the pre-competition and early competition phases. A FT 10k
runner should have a more substantial drop in mileage, up to 20%, but it
should remain relatively high. It is only during the peaking phase when a
FT runner can see significant mileage drops, while a ST runner should
only see very slight decreases. As far as the total amount for elite 10k
runners, the range varies widely from 80-90mpw for a FT to up to ~130
for a ST runner.
The long run also has more importance for a 10k than with the
shorter events. The progression starts the same with a focus on increasing
the distance (up to 14-20mi) first and then adding in “stuff.” From here it
diverges, as the long run should be thought of as an additional workout
during the base and even early pre-competition phases before tapering off
to maintenance as the competition phase begins. Until now, all other
events have stopped with add-ons before they became full blown
workouts. For the 10k, the progression should continue so that the
stimulus is much higher. This is done by increasing the end pickup during
the long run to up to 30-40minutes of steady to marathon pace work.
Additionally, the long run is often replaced with a long tempo run of up to
10-12 miles in length that should start at a steady pace and progress to
marathon pace or slightly faster. Lastly, alternations can be added to long
runs instead of pickups or long tempos.
Because of the long runs increased intensity, it is best to cycle the
long run every week. By cycling, I mean to establish a rotation of one
easy long run the first week, a long run with moderate add-ons the second,
and a long run with major add-ons or a full-blown long tempo the third.
The cycle does not have to be based on an easy long run every 3 weeks
--- PAGE 455 ---
but instead should be adjusted to the individual and how they recover.
During such a system, the workouts surrounding the long run would also
change. During the easy long run week, two “hard” workouts could be
done, while during the hard long run week it is best to include only one
other focus “hard” workout and include more moderate workouts instead.
An example of such a cycle would be the following:
·       16mi easy
·       15mi with 25min pickup at the end
·       14miles total, 2mile warm up, 10mi tempo, 2mi cool down
·       16mi easy
 
The long runs with pickups or long tempo runs are one way to create
aerobic support. Long alternation workouts are another great way. These
can initially serve as aerobic support and be progressed to serve as direct
endurance support and eventually specific endurance. The way to do this
is to start with the “hard” segments at marathon pace and the recovery
segments only very slightly slower and, as you progress, shorten the hard
segments and increase the pace, first to LT and finally to 10k pace. Once
at 10k pace, a specific endurance progression can take place, increasing
the distance of the hard segments or reducing the recovery. Aerobic
support should take place during the latter base phase and continue into
the pre-competition phase. Once in the pre-comp phase, transitioning
towards direct support should be done.
Lactate Threshold (LT) runs should be included and emphasized
during the pre-comp phase. The goal is to use split LT runs and increase
them to up to a maximum of 40 minutes total spent at LT for elites and 5-
10min shorter for others. As discussed previously, alternations can also
serve as direct support. For 10k runners, using some sort of add-on
stimulus to LT runs near the end of the pre-comp are beneficial. Possible
choices include hilly or uphill LT runs, surges during LT runs,
progressions at the end of the run, or adding another segment for combo
work. Adding on short segments of 10k paced work at the end of a
threshold run is a good way to transition towards specificity.
Lastly, strength endurance is an important part of successful 10k
training. During the base phase hill circuits can be done that include
running at aerobic paces and doing various general strength exercises.
--- PAGE 456 ---
Other possible options include runs on very hilly routes, aerobic hill
fartleks, and uphill threshold runs. During the pre-comp phase, these can
be made a little more specific by adding on hill repeats to the end of
various workouts. Lastly, shorter more intense hills can function to
enhance high intensity speed endurance and then doing specific combo
work where you separate intervals at 10k pace with short to medium
length hills can develop specific strength endurance.
 
Speed Side Development
General speed development for most 10k runners is done for
biomechanical and neural reasons. The neural reasons are why 10k
runners should still do hill sprints once a week during the base phase. The
hill sprints will function to increase the muscle fiber pool, increase force
development, and prevent injuries. Unlike with shorter events, some 10k
runners will not need to progress to flat sprints. Instead the goal should be
to increase the number done. Hill sprints perform the vital function of
maintaining speed when all of the mileage being done is pulling the body
towards only slow/aerobic adaptations. Sprint work helps to
counterbalance this out.
Additionally, during the base phase establishing good biomechanics
and comfort at faster paces is a must. With the high amounts of mileage
being run, it is easy to get flat, loose responsiveness in the muscles and
develop poor biomechanics. To counteract this, during the base phase easy
speed work should be done in the form of surges, strides, aerobic
intervals, and rhythm work. Start with introducing strides and surges to
distance runs and progress to adding an easy set of aerobic intervals to the
week. These intervals can be 100-400m intervals starting at 1mi to 5k
paces. Plenty of recovery should be given, and the effort should not be
hard as the goal is to teach the ability to run at a faster pace while being
relaxed and under control.
During the pre-competition phase the use of aerobic intervals and
other such strategies should continue. The aerobic intervals can branch off
to form full 5k paced workouts. One way to incorporate direct support (5k
paced) work is to use the early couple of workouts of a 5k specific
endurance progression. Another way is in the form of combo and blend
--- PAGE 457 ---
workouts, which have been covered before. During the competition
period, the 5k paced work should be used in combination with specific
10k work to create specific speed endurance. There are several
possibilities including blend and combo workouts or hill repeats.
 
Specific Development
Specific endurance development for the 10k begins in earnest during
the pre-competition phase. Prior to the beginning of the progression,
surges, pickups, and progressions create a base on which to build during
the base phase. Any of a combination of the specific endurance
progressions can be used. In particular, a Lydiard style time trial over 5-6k
at just faster than 10k pace is a useful way to end the specific endurance
development. This can often be easily accomplished by doing a small 5k
road race at just faster than 10k effort 2 weeks before the 10k. For elite
runners, alternations can create a MaxLASS (lactate steady state) at
around 10k pace, which will enhance a runner’s ability to close fast in a
race.
For specific speed endurance, the combining of specific work and
5k pace work is what should be done. Once again, how to do this is only
limited by your imagination. One way that focuses on the ability to finish
is by progressing within an interval. For example, doing 1600m repeats
with the first 800m at 10k pace and the next 800m at 5k pace works well.
Similarly, combo workouts that are done in ladder form and focus on
finishing at faster 3k-5k paces will accomplish the job. Finally, blend
workouts are another good choice. Blend longer segments at 10k pace
with shorter segments starting at 5k pace and get faster as the workout
goes along, or substitute the faster work for hill repeats. An example of a
blend workout could be 1600, 2x300 at 5k pace, 1200, 400 at 3k pace,
1000, 2x200 at 1mile pace with the longer segments being at 10k pace and
taking 3-4min rest after the long segments, and 1-2min after the short.
 
 
 
Maintenance
--- PAGE 458 ---
General endurance is maintained through the use of long runs. Long
run volume should be kept high as a form of maintenance throughout the
pre-comp period with occasional moderate add-ons. Additionally, shorter
marathon paced runs or progression runs top off general endurance and
should be done once every 2-4 weeks. Similarly, threshold runs or some
mixed combo or progression run should be used to maintain direct and
aerobic support.
Due to the large volume of endurance work, hill sprints should be
used pretty frequently for most 10k runners, as it can be their only very
fast stimulus during certain training periods. Thus, hill sprints or a similar
stimulus should be done once every 7-14 days. Specific endurance can be
maintained through easy intervals and fartleks during the base phase or
during the peaking process.
See appendix for examples/progressions for each workout type.
--- PAGE 459 ---
  

--- PAGE 460 ---
 
Marathon
Unlike all of the other events covered, fuel use is the major cause of
fatigue in the marathon. This creates a situation where we not only have to
train to be able to run at our goal pace for the entire race, but we also have
to train the fuel system to be able to have enough fuel to run at that pace
for 26.2 miles. To improve the fuel system we must either increase the
total supply, decrease the rate of glycogen use at race pace, or some
combination of both. To accomplish these goals, the training must be
developed in two different ways; one focused on developing enough
endurance at race pace to last aerobically and biomechanically, and
another focused on the fuel system issues. Or, in plain English, we must
--- PAGE 461 ---
train to be comfortable at marathon pace, and train so that we don’t hit the
wall.
 
Endurance Side Development
The foundation of a good marathon is built on a large base of
general endurance. General endurance is not only needed to lay the
foundation of aerobic development but also to establish a biomechanical
base. One often overlooked factor for marathon performance is
withstanding the pounding and subsequent muscle damage that occurs
over 26.2 miles. Due to the pounding and large amount of eccentric
contractions, particularly on hilly courses, muscle damage will occur. As
muscle damage increases, efficiency decreases, so it negatively affects
performance. High mileage and long runs are not only used for aerobic
endurance, but they also serve to prepare the body to withstand the stress
of running such a long way. The base period should focus on increasing
the distance of the long run and total mileage. Total mileage should
progressively increase, reaching maximum during the later part of the pre-
competition, and remaining very close to max until the tapering phase.
Volume is needed first, and then intensity can be built upon this volume.
General endurance should be focused initially only on easy running
and increasing the total volume, but it should progress to the inclusion of
steady paced running. This progression can start with short pickups at the
end of runs and then include moderate progression runs or longer steady
paced tempo runs. The long run should increase progressively in distance
without concern over pace initially. Only during the pre-competition
period should the intensity of the long run start to be a focus. Initially,
moderate surges, pickups, and progressions should be added, while during
the later pre-comp phase a specific progression should be introduced that
includes marathon paced running during the long run.
Unlike other events, the direct endurance support is actually a pace
that is faster than marathon pace. Half marathon pace or Lactate Threshold
pace serves as direct support. The reason is that paces around LT serve to
increase our high-end aerobic abilities. This sets the stage for increasing
our specific marathon speed. If the opposite approach were taken,
focusing on marathon pace or slightly slower first and then focusing on LT
--- PAGE 462 ---
work, two problems would arise. First, in this approach, the latter LT work
would increase the rate of glycogen use, which would not be a good idea
for the marathon. Second, there is only a small gap between marathon
pace and LT, and by doing marathon pace work first, there is less room for
improvement of the marathon pace. Instead if LT is developed first, then it
increases the gap between LT and marathon pace, which then allows for
the subsequent marathon specific work to close that gap during the
competition period.
Therefore, during the pre-competition phase the focus should be on
developing the LT. This does not mean runs solely at LT but rather an
array of paces surrounding LT. Runs at LT and slightly faster than LT will
work on developing the aerobic abilities of the muscle fibers in slightly
different ways. The faster work will focus more on the development of
more Fast Twitch muscle fibers, while slightly slower than LT will focus
on the Slow Twitch fibers. Additionally, work slightly faster than LT will
induce a small amount of ever increasing lactate into the system. To work
on lactate use as fuel use alternations, which can improve the fuel system
by delaying glycogen use, these alternations should consist of alternating
at just faster than LT and just slower than LT.
Lastly, strength endurance is an important part of successful
marathon training. During the base phase hill circuits, hilly runs, or uphill
runs can be used for development from the endurance side. This type of
work can be continued during the pre-competition phase, in particular
uphill LT runs or hilly LT runs are useful. Hilly LT runs will lead to a
similar response as alternations done just above and below LT. During the
uphill portion an increase in lactate will occur even without an increase in
effort because hills cause an increase in FT muscle fibers. During the
downhill or flat section, if run at LT, then the lactate created during the
uphill portion can be used. In addition, strength endurance should be
developed from the speed standpoint, which will be discussed shortly.
 
Speed Side Development
Speed development for the marathon functions to improve
biomechanical efficiency, increase the amount of muscle fibers available
to do the work, increase strength and power, and above all to make
--- PAGE 463 ---
marathon pace feel as relaxed as possible. During the base period, hill
sprints are used to increase strength, power, and neural recruitment. In
addition, short surges or aerobic intervals at 5k, 3k, and 1mi pace are used.
These are not full workouts but should rather be thought of as for
biomechanical reasons.
The pre-competition period is when anaerobic support and direct
support work are brought to maximum. 5k-10k paced work is done both
for biomechanical reasons and to improve aerobic abilities, specifically to
increase the amount and rate of aerobic energy that can be supplied. This
can initially be done by progressive or combo work, and later through
aerobic intervals, longer intervals, and alternations. To start with, adding
on a short segment at 10k pace to an LT work is a good way to introduce
10k pace, while extending the cruise work done at 3k paces during the
base phase to include short intervals at 5k pace work can serve as its
introduction. The development of speed support can be done by using the
first part of the specific endurance progressions for the 5k and 10k races.
The only difference when taking this approach is to stop the progression
earlier and to use more blend workouts. In this way, alternations, blends,
or combo workouts can also be included. The end goal is to increase high-
end aerobic abilities and establish a level of comfort at faster paces.
During the specific period, this work needs to be kept to a
minimum. The reason is that larger doses of 5k, 10k, and LT work shifts
the fuel system to rely more on glycogen. This happens because when
running at these faster paces the fuel supply is never the issue; therefore
the body is worried about what the best way is to supply energy rapidly,
not on how to conserve it for a marathon. Therefore, only short
maintenance work should be done.
Lastly is the issue of strength endurance from the speed perspective.
Initially, the foundation of strength endurance is developed through hill
sprints. From here, hill circuits work well, as do blend and alternation
work at 5k-10k paces. Additionally, medium length hills (200-600m) at
1mi-5k effort during the base or early pre-competition phase will convert
some of that pure speed to high intensity strength endurance. As we go
later into the pre-competition period, longer hills at 5k-10k paces can be
used to develop both direct speed support and strength endurance. Finally,
--- PAGE 464 ---
during the competition phase, uphill tempo’s or hilly long runs put the
finishing touches on specific strength endurance.
 
Specific Development
Running at or slightly faster and slower than goal marathon pace is
the key intensity for many of the adaptations that are necessary for
improved marathon performance. Specific development comes in several
forms. First, the ability to endure for 2 hours or more comes from
progressively increasing the distance of the long run to that length.
Second, and most importantly, is the development of specific endurance
by extending endurance at marathon pace.
During the base phase, marathon pace is included for short periods
of time at the end of runs in the form of moderate pickups and
progressions. Specific endurance for the marathon is usually built in two
different ways. First, alternations or long fartlek segments are used. In
alternations, we generally start with short alternations of around 800m at
marathon pace alternated with an equal segment at a just slower pace.
From here, the marathon pace segment increases progressively up to a
max of around 4 miles, while the recovery segment generally stays
between 800-1mile in length. In addition, the total volume of these
alternations starts at a relatively low distance of 6-7miles and increases to
up to 18-20miles worth of total work. If alternations were used to develop
direct endurance support, then one option is to continue the progression of
those workouts by progressively slowing and lengthening the faster
segment until it is at marathon pace, then building specific endurance
from there.
The second way is through longer tempos or progressions. Early on,
progressions will only end with a small portion at marathon pace, but as
the season progresses, more and more of the run should be done at
marathon pace or slightly faster. Progressions usually serve as a great
introduction or transition to marathon pace. Long Tempo’s should start out
as simple pick-ups at the end of distance runs before becoming a workout
in and of themselves. These tempo runs should start fairly short at around
6 miles and progressively increase. For a straight marathon paced tempo,
the maximum volume varies by level and athlete type. A general rule is to
--- PAGE 465 ---
work up to near 13-18mi, though such a workout is very stressful and
should only be used sparingly. Depending on the purpose of the workout,
these can either be done on their own or as an add-on to the long run. By
doing them as an add-on to the long run, the first portion of the long run
will serve to fatigue the runner and deplete their glycogen stores. Due to
this pre-fatigue, the fuel system will be stressed to a higher degree, forcing
adaptations in either fuel capacity or usage.
While some long runs or long workouts should include practicing
fuel intake, particularly your one or two key longer workouts, some long
runs and marathon pace runs should be done without taking in
supplemental fuel. The reason is that we are trying to decrease glycogen
stores during longer runs because that is the signal for adaptation. When
the body encounters low glycogen, it triggers a response (see Chapter: The
Genetics of Training) that causes adaptations to prevent the body from
encountering low glycogen at the same intensity and duration as before.
Supplemental fuel such as gels or sports drinks would impede this trigger.
It is a balancing act of perfecting fuel intake and avoiding supplemental
fuel. A good rule is to alternate whether supplemental fuel is taken in or
not.
 
Maintenance
While maintenance work for the marathon was mentioned in the
previous sections, I’ll briefly go over it again. General endurance is
maintained through the use of long runs and high mileage. While many
long runs include specific work, every 2-4 weeks depending on the phase,
a long run should be of almost entirely easy running. Aerobic Support is
similarly maintained with easy to steady distance running.
Direct endurance support is maintained mostly through end of the
workout pickups and progressions. During the competition phase,
maintenance style threshold runs can be included. For anaerobic support,
maintenance includes short aerobic intervals that are limited in volume to
keep from them affecting the fuel system during the competition phase.
Direct speed support is similarly maintained through short aerobic
intervals or as a form of combo work. General speed is maintained
through strides, hill sprints, and short aerobic intervals or rhythm work.
--- PAGE 466 ---
 
See appendix for examples/progressions for each workout type.
--- PAGE 470 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 472 ---
21

--- PAGE 473 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 474 ---
Special Workouts and Strength
Training
“One of the big mistakes when you are able to improve using a
program is to suppose you can continue to improve using the same type of
program. Instead, you must change the program! Because, why are you
able to (improve)?” Renato Canova
 
Strength Endurance: The Key to
Developing a Kick
One key to developing a kick is the idea of strength endurance.
Strength endurance is the ability to maintain strength (force production)
during fatigue, or in other words the ability to use your strength for longer.
For simplicity’s sake, in terms of running think of it as combining
exercises/runs that require a larger amount of strength with an element of
endurance. Before getting into the details of actually creating a strength
endurance session, let’s look at some of the science behind it.
We have all admired and wondered how certain runners are able to
maintain perfect running form while their legs are searing with pain on the
final homestretch of the race. There are many hypotheses about how the
athletes are more aerobic or better able to deal with the (wrongly) accused
poison lactic acid, but what actually happens during the final straight
away?
Studies by Numella have looked at strength endurance by looking at
muscle activity and force production changes during fatigue in runners. In
one study he demonstrated that force production capacities decreased by
about 25% at the end of a 400m, and this decrease correlated with
increases in by-products. In addition to the strength reduction there was an
increase in ground contact time and a decrease in ground reaction forces
during the latter portion of the race. These findings confirmed that the
ability to maintain a high level of strength, also known as strength
endurance, could be vital in maintaining speed during the final stretch of
the race. However, at this point it is still theoretical. It makes sense that
--- PAGE 475 ---
maintaining strength levels longer would prevent slow down because
force production into the ground would be maintained longer, and thus
ground contact times would not decrease as fast. Getting form theory to
practice required another study.
In the last study, Miguel and colleagues compared explosive
strength and explosive strength endurance of fast runners (48sec or better
for 400m) to slower runners (49sec or slower). They measured the
attributes with a series of vertical jumps and a 30 second continuous jump
for height to measure strength endurance. By comparing these two groups,
it could be seen if faster runners had more strength endurance than slower
ones. Not surprisingly, the faster runners had significantly better explosive
strength and strength endurance. The better strength endurance allowed
the faster runners to maintain ground contact times during the end of the
race. With the association established, it can be safely concluded that
higher levels of strength endurance help combat fatigue during the latter
part of a 400m race.
How do we actually develop strength endurance? Here’s my 3-step
cheat sheet guide to strength endurance and kick development:
 
1.     Increase maximum fibers recruited
2.     Improve ability to use for prolonged time
3.     Learn to recruit them under high acidity
 
Developing A Strength Endurance
Program
In developing a program for strength endurance it is important to
remember that our main goal is to be able to finish races faster. In terms of
strength endurance, this means maintaining strength levels for longer,
maintaining ground contact, and maintaining proper running mechanics,
or, in essence, resisting the muscular and neural effects of fatigue.
An obvious but often overlooked aspect of developing strength
endurance is the need for a satisfactory level of overall strength from
which to develop the endurance. If there is not a decent base of strength to
work off of, then it cannot be extended to last very long. The general
--- PAGE 476 ---
strength needed can be developed by sprint, plyometric, and explosive
power/ballistic training. As mentioned previously, such training as sprint
work will increase the total recruitable muscle fiber pool. This first step is
needed before strength endurance can be developed.
 
Strength Endurance Development
Once this base of strength is developed, the focus must be switched
to extending the strength, i.e., converting it to strength endurance. The
first step in this conversion is adding an endurance component to the
strength work. Just being able to recruit more muscle fibers does not
guarantee success. The strength gains are useless unless they can last for a
period of time that can aid the athlete. It does the athlete no good to recruit
more fibers if they don’t last long enough to be used during a race. Also,
increasing the proportion of fibers that can be used is another key in
developing strength endurance.
The concept of non-specific lactate accumulation is also important
when discussing the benefits of strength endurance work. Arthur Lydiard
was one of the earliest coaches to note that high levels of lactate work
seemed to have a negative effect on aerobic abilities. This led to an
overreaction to avoid all faster workouts or higher lactate work during the
base phase. The key is not in completely avoiding faster or moderate
lactate work but in ensuring balance between the faster work and the
aerobic work. One way to transition or introduce higher lactate work is
through circuits. When completing circuits, the exercises will introduce
some lactate into the system. Since the exercises are not specific to
running, most of the muscles producing the lactate are slightly different
from those used when running, or they are being recruited in a different
way than when running. That means we aren’t training the specific
running muscle fibers to produce or deal with lactate directly. As a result,
none of the negative effects on the aerobic abilities occur. Additionally,
during the subsequent running session, lactate use can be trained, as the
muscle fibers can be trained to take up and use the lactate from the blood
stream. Non-specific lactate work is a great way to train not only strength
endurance but also moderate lactate accumulation during the base or early
--- PAGE 477 ---
pre-competition phases when we do not want to negatively affect the
aerobic system.
Strength endurance work can be separated in terms of how specific
it is to the goal of running a race. For simplicity’s sake it can be divided
into three categories: general, high intensity, and specific strength
endurance.
 
General Strength Endurance
In general strength endurance work, the goal is to start the process
of extending our ability to use a high proportion of our strength over a
longer period of time. The exercises and runs are not specific in terms of
type, intensity, or duration. The possibilities of creating general strength
endurance are almost endless. Briefly we will go through some of the
different methods.
Hills are one of the tried and true methods that have been used
almost since the inception of our sport. Runs over hilly courses at easy to
moderate speeds are a great way to work on general strength endurance.
Because the speed and intensity are not close to race speed, it falls into the
general category. Hills offer a wide variety of options which include
simple runs over hilly terrain, easy to moderate repeats of running up and
down a portion of a hill, uphill strength endurance circuits, and longer
moderate repeats uphill.
Circuits are another great way to develop general strength
endurance. The Italian coach Renato Canova developed a great
progression of circuits in more recent years, while Arthur Lydiard had his
famous hill circuits in the 1960’s. The first step in creating a strength
endurance circuit is a rather simple one. Take general exercises and add an
endurance component. One simple way to accomplish this is to separate
each set of exercises with a run. The pace of the run should be easy at first
and then progressively increased as you develop general strength
endurance to more specific strength endurance. A good place to start is to
have both the exercises and run at roughly 70% effort. The length of each
set of the circuit depends on the event that the athlete will run. The longer
the race, the longer the circuit should be. A general rule of thumb is to
have each repetition be as long as an aerobic interval workout would be
--- PAGE 478 ---
for that athlete. For example, a 10k runner who does 5x 2000m repeats
would do a circuit that is approximately 5-6 minutes in length and do this
circuit 5 times with appropriate rest in between.
Another option that a coach has is to do the circuits uphill. This will
further increase the strength component, and thus fiber recruitment, during
the running portion of the circuit. This makes it so that not only do the
exercises have a strength component, but the running portion does too.
With the hill, more muscle fibers will be recruited than during a flat
ground circuit.
In terms of what exercises to use during a circuit, it depends on what
you want to accomplish during the workout. The focus can be on the legs,
arms, core, or overall body endurance. In addition, you can make the
exercises focus on a specific component, for example if the athlete tends
to lose bounce when tired he can do more explosive exercises, such as
various hops. The key to deciding what exercises to use and the
sequencing are to evaluate the athlete and what their needs are. Watch
your athletes finish races and see what portions of their running mechanics
break down. That will give you a good idea of what the focus should be
on.
Another way to increase strength endurance is in the use of long
runs. Long runs done the day after a hard workout will help accomplish
this goal because of the residual fatigue of the workout. The muscles will
not be fully recovered by the next day after the workout, and in doing a
long run you are working heavily on the endurance component. Also,
because the athlete goes into the run pre fatigued, more and different
muscle fibers will have to be recruited (and thus trained aerobically) to
sustain the workload during the latter part of the long run. In a similar
vein, doing strength work then immediately following it with a run at an
easy to moderate intensity will increase strength endurance levels. The
strength workout will recruit different muscles than just running would
and will fatigue them. Then by going for a run afterwards, those muscles
are worked on aerobically, or other muscles have to cycle in and be
recruited to take up the workload.
 
High Intensity Strength Endurance
--- PAGE 479 ---
Once a base of general strength endurance has been established it is
time to increase the intensity. This can be accomplished by altering the
circuits or by including longer hill repeats. Hill repeats (200-600m) that
are very intense (mile effort or faster) with long recoveries are one way to
improve high intensity strength endurance. My High School coach, Gerald
Stewart, was a fan of using 300 and 400m repeats up a moderate hill with
a slow jog down. Towards the end of the session, your body is trying to
maintain fiber recruitment for running uphill under heavily fatigued
conditions. In strength endurance circuits, there are several different ways
of adding the intensity to the circuits. Either you can increase the intensity
of the exercise itself, increase the intensity of the run connecting the
exercises, or increase both. What method you use depends on the goal of
the circuit.
Adding intensity to the exercises themselves will recruit additional
muscle fibers and increase the strength component of the workout. In
addition, since the recovery between the exercises, the run, is performed at
a moderate intensity the muscles do not get full recovery. Because of this
lack of recovery and the fact that the strength requirement is higher, the
athlete is teaching his body how to recruit additional fibers while
becoming progressively fatigued. This is a great way to train the body to
maintain high fiber recruitment over a longer duration. The key difference
between this type of work and general circuits is that the athlete is
fatiguing at a much higher rate. Thus he is training his muscles to be able
to last longer, but this time at a much higher intensity.
Another way to increase the intensity is to increase the speed of the
running part. The running part is then the main part of the workout, and
the exercises at a medium intensity serve as the recovery portion. In doing
the circuit this way, the focus is on running, thus it is more specific.
The exercises then serve as a way of forcing fiber recruitment after
the fibers have been heavily fatigued during the running part. When
running at a high intensity, the athlete is quickly fatiguing the fibers used
and rotating new ones in to take their place. The force requirement can
only be so much, and with the continued fatigue, the athlete cannot keep
recruiting new fibers. To try to force the body to change up the
recruitment and recruit more of its supply (remember, the athlete never
reaches full fiber recruitment), exercises are used. The exercises, such as
--- PAGE 480 ---
various plyos or bounds, will force additional and slightly different muscle
fiber recruitment due to the explosiveness of the activity and the fact that
the force requirement is higher. In this type of circuit, the goal is
obviously to try to translate to specific high intensity strength endurance.
 
Sample Circuit
For General strength endurance the runs and exercises are
moderately hard in nature, so that the paces would be around 10k effort.
During the High Intensity strength endurance circuit, the runs and
exercises would be performed at much higher intensities and have longer
recovery between each circuit.
Kick Development
The final step is a continuation of high intensity strength endurance
work, only in the most specific way. The goal is to reach a high level of
fatigue, then try to  force fiber recruitment under these conditions, and
then continue to run, thus training those fibers to be recruited during
running under such conditions.
Following these guidelines, we want to do some running that causes
fatigue then go immediately into an activity that forces fiber recruitment,
and then go immediately into running. We don’t want a long delay
between the running and exercise, so that leaves us with a couple of basic
options. First, if you are fortunate enough to have a place where there is a
flat section, a short hill, then it levels out at the top of the hill, that is
perfect. Run at a fast pace for 30sec on the flat to the hill, then sprint up
the hill and continue that sprint for 15-20sec at the top of the hill. For the
rest of us who aren’t fortunate enough to have such an arrangement, the
best way to go about it is by using bounding in the middle of intervals. A
--- PAGE 481 ---
workout I often use is to run sets of a broken 500m, with 200m fast, 100m
bounding, and 200m kick in. Run the first 200m at around 800m pace, go
straight into bounding, then straight into 200m kick in. For most runners 2
sets will do, but with more experienced runners 3 or 4 can be used. There
are many variations of this type of work, just use your imagination.
Lastly, we want to teach the athlete how to kick. Learning how to
gradually accelerate and change the running mechanics during the last part
of the race is a skill that needs to be learned. To begin with, added
segments at faster paces, such as those used during specific speed
endurance work, teach the athlete how to change paces when fatigued.
The problem is that in reality when we kick it isn’t an abrupt change;
therefore we must work on progressing from race pace to a faster pace
within the interval itself. Teach this gradual progression with an emphasis
on how to change mechanics at first during short workouts that progress
from race pace to a kick. Research shows that each runner has a particular
signature in how they kick. They use a preferred change in stride length
and rate, and it is often in the opposite direction of their preferred running
style. This means that if they rely heavily on a very quick turnover during
the run, that is likely maxed out, so they will try to lengthen their stride
during the kick. Train so that each athlete has the ability to change either
rate or length so that they have more options in their arsenal.
The goal is to lengthen the interval. An example would be to start
with 200m segments with the first 100m at race pace and the last 100m
being a kick in and progress to where athletes are running 1000m intervals
with the first 800m at race pace (for the 2mile or 5k for example) and the
last 200m being a gradual kick in. As for biomechanical cues, teach the
runners that the arms dictate what the legs do, so lengthen and increase the
arm stroke using it to control the tempo. The bottom line is that this
progression will teach a runner how to increase his kick and be ready to
race.
 
Creating a MaxLASS at Race Pace
For elite runners, a MaxLASS is a lactate steady state at 5k or
longer race pace. We are accustomed to thinking about the fastest speed
that we can have a lactate steady state as being lactate threshold or around
--- PAGE 482 ---
half marathon pace. However, research done by Renato Canova has
demonstrated that well-trained elite runners can create a steady state for a
short period at 5k and 10k race pace. This has been given as one reason
why African runners can finish the latter part of their race at much faster
paces, closer to their top end speed, than their western counterparts.
Remember that while lactate doesn’t cause fatigue, it corresponds with
fatigue, so that is why a lactate steady state is important. It essentially
means that fatigue products are at a steady state too. While there is much
research to be done, by using Canova’s research we can come up with an
idea about how to create a MaxLASS for elite runners.
The caveat to developing a steady state is that it only can occur in
well-trained runners who are very fit. One hypothesis is that the lifetime
aerobic base of Africans allows them to create such a steady state.
Combining this with what we know about the dynamics of lactate, a very
well-developed aerobic system is a requirement. Thus two prerequisites to
developing this special MaxLASS are a very high level of general
endurance and a well-developed lactate threshold. Additionally, Canova
demonstrated that a high level of strength endurance is the third
requirement. Once these three components are created, then they have to
be put together. Therefore, our steps for creating a lactate steady state are
as follows:
 
1.     Develop a high level of General Endurance.
2.     Develop a high Lactate Threshold.
3.     Develop Strength Endurance.
4.     Top it off with Specific Endurance and specific endurance combined
with strength endurance.
 
In America or any Western country we will never be able to generate
the natural aerobic base that African runners have since our society is built
on convenience and inactivity. Instead, we have to do it in organized
fashion. For all runners that means a focus on first increasing general
endurance. This means a smart gradual progression of volume of training
and a good deal of easy to moderate high end aerobic endurance work. The
longer moderate workouts such as sustained tempos, thresholds, and
--- PAGE 483 ---
progression runs help make up the gap of general endurance. Other ways
of increasing general endurance have been covered throughout the book.
The next step is to increase the lactate threshold. Once again, this
has been covered throughout the book, but to briefly rehash, transition
marathon pace and progression work into LT workouts, then increase the
quantity of total LT work and then the frequency of LT workouts. From
here, add in hilly LT runs or uphill LT runs and combo work with some
running at just faster than LT. To top off the threshold, some faster work
needs to be done, including long intervals at 10k pace and aerobic
intervals at 3k-5k paces.
At the same time as threshold development, strength endurance
development should be started. How to develop strength endurance was
discussed earlier in this chapter. It is the combination of a well-developed
LT and strength endurance that allows for the final step.
The last step is to use alternations to create a lactate steady state.
Start with alternations at race pace and a steady pace. The goal is to first
progress the pace of the steady portion of the alternation and then increase
the lengths of the race pace portion. The aim is to increase the steady
portion pace to near LT. When this is done, the body will be trained to deal
with the lactate that is produced during the race pace portion of the
segment. If progressed well, the body will adapt by gradually reducing the
amount of lactate in the blood at race pace, eventually creating a steady
state.
Creating a MaxLASS is one of the keys for world class 5k and 10k
performance. While the number of runners who reach this level is
minimal, all runners can still benefit from taking this approach. In the end,
while a steady state will not be created for most runners, decreasing the
lactate accumulation at steady state will be beneficial, as that means that
fatigue products are accumulating at a slower rate.
 
Strength Training for Endurance
Athletes
Strength training evokes a polarized response from coaches, runners,
and scientists with some emphasizing it and others completely neglecting
--- PAGE 484 ---
it. Furthermore, among those who do strength training, there is no
consensus on what the best approach is. So, what is an athlete to do? Ask
most distance runners, and they’ll say a high rep low weight approach is
the best strength training program, but in reality this is far from the truth.
I’m always hesitant to write about strength training for endurance
runners, because while it does help, it has to be implemented correctly.
Before delving into how that is done, there are some overarching rules
with strength training. First, running is king, and the strength work should
not take away from the running. If strength work starts to interfere with
your more important running sessions (after a short adaptation period to
strength training obviously), then the strength training should be
decreased. Second, strength training is highly individual. I’ll discuss how
to individualize the training later in this chapter, but it is important to
recognize that unlike with running, not every single strength training
method is needed by every runner. While heavy training, power training,
and plyometrics can all provide benefits, their importance for each
individual differs greatly. Especially with heavy training, some runners
need it because they need the neural benefits, while others can minimize
or skip that type of training because it is not important for their event or
their individual physiology. Keep these rules in mind throughout this
chapter.
Before getting into how a runner should strength train, let’s cover
the biggest fear of runners: weight gain. Gaining muscle mass is the
number one reason why runners don’t want to strength train. This fear of
bulking up is largely unfounded if trained properly. This is clear to see
when we look at how muscle mass is developed.
 
A Weighty Matter
An increase in muscle size is called Hypertrophy. As long as runners
avoid work that causes hypertrophy there will be little to no change in
muscle size. So, the answer is simple, don’t do work that increases muscle
size. The practical application is a little more difficult.
Hypertrophy is largely dependent on muscle protein breakdown. A
large amount of protein needs to be degraded to create a
supercompensation like effect during recovery where protein synthesis
--- PAGE 485 ---
occurs. This supercompensation effect leads to greater protein synthesis
and thus an increase in muscle size. Total protein breakdown is a function
of the rate of protein breakdown and the amount of time (or in other words
total amount of reps) spent lifting. In general, the heavier the weight lifted
the higher the rate of protein breakdown. So this means that heavy lifting
creates hypertrophy right? Most runners come to this conclusion, but they
forget the second part of the equation, the time or total work part. When
lifting heavy weights, the rate of breakdown is high, but the number of
total reps is very low, so the total protein breakdown is not very high.
Instead, to maximize protein degradation, and thus hypertrophy, a lift that
is of a moderately heavy weight (50-65% of 1RM for example) for a
moderate amount of reps (6-12 for example) is done. It is no coincidence
that body builders use mostly these in between weights and rep numbers.
For a distance runner, the plan should be to avoid this in between zone and
to limit the total workload to avoid hypertrophy.
But the story does not stop there as caloric intake and protein
balance play a large role. In order for this supercompensation to take
place, enough extra protein needs to be lying around to cause a large
amount of protein synthesis. For most distance runners they are either at
neutral or a slight negative protein balance due to the large volume of
running they are doing. Thus, for most runners doing higher volumes of
training, they have little to worry about as far as weight gain goes no
matter what. Just like in training for endurance, strength training is highly
individual too. Fast Twitch runners are more likely to have enough spare
protein lying around to build muscle, so they have to be more cautious.
In their case, diet plays a large role, particularly after the strength
workout. In looking at the signaling pathways for adaptations, we know
that Amino Acids act on the same pathway (mTOR) that causes an
increase in muscle size. Branched Chain Amino Acids (BCAA) can
activate the mTOR pathway, particularly when taken after a strength
training workout. So following resistance training it is probably not a good
idea to refuel with BCAAs if the goal is not to increase muscle fiber size.
Another factor that plays a role is the timing of training. Once again,
research shows that one of the key determinants of an increase in muscle
size is continual high levels of mTOR activation. Fortunately for runners,
the signaling pathway that is activated with endurance training (AMPK)
--- PAGE 486 ---
not only works to increase mitochondria, but also to inhibit the strength
gaining mTOR pathway. The mTOR pathway does not reach its highest
activation during the workout but instead steadily increases and peaks
after post workout. It is this near constant prolonged activation that
stimulates muscle growth. Unlike mTOR, AMPK is highest during the
endurance work and decreases once glycogen is replenished. What this
means is that if the goal is to minimize muscle size gains, an easy way to
achieve this is by doing strength training first followed by some easy
endurance work. By timing the training in this way, the AMPK activation
during the endurance training will inhibit the mTOR pathway and not
allow it to stay elevated for very long post strength training.
 
How to Strength Train
The goals of strength training for endurance athletes should be to
improve injury resistance, gain neural adaptations such as increasing
muscle fiber pool, and improve rate of force development (RFD). These
adaptations combine to improve efficiency, speed, and strength endurance.
The bases of any strength program for runners should start with movement
and act as an almost pre-habilitation program. The scope of how to
identify individual needs and exercise selection for runners is beyond the
scope of this book. I highly recommend Jay Dicharry’s Anatomy for
Runners as a valuable text to lay the foundation. This movement-based
foundation should function much like your base phase of running would.
Get the basics down and establish movement and foundational strength
before progressing to training for performance. The training discussed in
the rest of the chapter is the next step once the movement-based training is
done.
As I have mentioned previously, if we look at fatigue from a neural
and muscular perspective, fatigue can occur when muscle fiber
recruitment decreases and when force development cannot occur in a
quick enough time (thus longer ground contact times when fatigued). If
we can increase the amount of fibers available to do work, decrease their
relative percent of force while running by increasing their strength, and
improve our power to maintain force development, then performance is
improved.
--- PAGE 487 ---
Running, even long distance running, is mostly a function of power
and thus RFD. Maximum force development takes at minimum .3-.4
seconds. If we look at ground contact times for sprinters, they are
generally around .1 seconds, and for distance runners during races, times
are .13-.17 seconds. This clearly demonstrates that while maximum force
is nice, it is really about how quickly we can exert the force needed to
maintain our pace. In other words the RFD plays a large role.
In addition to force development, increasing the muscle fiber pool
can also play a role in enhancing performance. A larger pool of fibers
means more potential fibers to cycle in and handle the workload. Since we
know that force requirement is what determines muscle recruitment, it
only makes sense that heavy lifting or high force activities will maximize
fiber recruitment. Increasing the fiber pool while lifting is nice, but where
it really benefits runners is when this is translated to an increase in the
recruitable fiber pool when actually running. This can be done through
sprinting and sets up the runner for an increase in strength endurance.
Essentially, lifting to increase the recruitable fiber pool serves as the base
of strength endurance training, which is invaluable for runners.
The way to accomplish these goals is not the traditional high reps,
low weight method. Instead, start with the complete opposite, higher
weight low reps. The reason is that when lifting heavy for only 1-6 reps,
the enhancements in strength are almost entirely neural. The heavy weight
challenges the nervous system without having a high total volume to elicit
enough of a protein response to trigger changes in muscle size. Therefore,
heavy training with low reps is the way to go for neurally induced gains in
strength and muscle fiber recruitment.
Neural improvements occur via several mechanisms. Muscle force
is regulated by four basic factors: the amount of muscle recruited, the
firing frequency of the fibers, the recruitment pattern at the motor unit
level, and the motor programming of several muscle groups working in
synch. Recruitment pattern at the motor unit level refers to how motor unit
recruitment occurs and whether it is in a cyclic fashion like in endurance
activities or in a synchronous fashion like in power events. At the whole
body level, the motor programming refers to how well a group of muscles
interact and work together to produce force for a particular movement. An
example of improved motor programming can be seen when the muscle
--- PAGE 488 ---
opposite of the one doing the work learns to relax. In beginners, you’ll
often see what is called co-contraction. Co-contraction is when the muscle
doing the work and its opposing muscle are contracting at the same time.
This is obviously more inefficient than if the opposing muscle would relax
and thus not resist the movement.
 
Exercise Selection
With heavy lifting, the focus should be on the prime movers used in
your sport. For runners that means the legs (quads, hamstrings, glutes,
etc.). The use of full body movements instead of muscle isolation is also
important. That means, lunges, squats, cleans, dead lifts, split squats, and a
myriad of other choices. The exact exercises to use are beyond the scope
of this book, but it is important to maintain proper form when lifting, so if
you cannot complete a lift with proper form, do not do that lift.
Remember that the goal of this first phase of strength training is to
function in the same way that general endurance or speed functions. It sets
the table for the important adaptations later. The benefits are for total
muscle recruitment and similar neural adaptations, thus it is a general not
specific adaptation. We aren’t overly concerned with having the
movement mimic the activity exactly because the general gains will be
converted to the specific movement later. We just need the exercises to be
similar enough in muscle use that we can gradually transition to a specific
running exercise. For example, heavy squats increase total recruitable
motor units, then power training is done in a slightly more specific way to
work on muscle recruitment in a short period of time, but then it really
comes together during plyo/sprint sessions when you train recruitment in a
way that strongly relates to running (i.e., sprinting).
The volume will vary with each individual, but for distance runners
the idea should be to get the most gains with a minimal physical and
psychological commitment. For that reason, I prefer to keep all strength
training sessions short, taking around 30-45 minutes to complete. For this
reason, most runners can do between 2-4 exercises with 1-2 sets of each
exercise when lifting heavy. The rep total should be low within a set.
Training should not be done to failure, as research has demonstrated that
non-hypertrophy strength and power gains occur when performing
--- PAGE 489 ---
exercises not to failure. This means to stop the lift before performance
during the lift decreases. Also, the subsequent fatigue, muscle damage,
and cortisol levels are much lower. The weight lifted depends on the
runner but should be moderately challenging. There is no need to overload
the runner, as heavy for them is different than heavy for a regular lifter.
Lifting for most runners is akin to lifting for untrained athletes, so a
relatively heavy load will be a completely new stimulus.
 
Power Training
The neural heavy lifting strength training forms the base off of
which to work. Once the base is established training shifts to power
development or ballistic training. The goal here is once again to work on
fiber recruitment, but this time with an emphasis on force development in
a relatively short time, otherwise known as power. The goal is to improve
RFD by using exercises that become more and more similar to running in
terms of muscle function. Additionally, ballistic training offers a great way
to recruit FT fibers, as it can violate the size principle of recruiting ST
fibers first then FT. By teaching recruitment of FT fibers first, this can
later be translated into recruitment of those harder to activate fibers when
under heavy fatigue. This is done through specific or high intensity
strength endurance work.
The goal of power training is to maximize power output. Power
exercises consist of explosive movements that take place in a short period
of time with a light to moderate external weight. Power work often gets
confused with plyometric training. The difference is that power training is
concerned with a single explosive movement followed by a brief period of
rest and then repeating the explosive movement. On the other hand,
plyometrics consist of a series of movements one after another with the
goal in minimizing the time spent on the ground.
Even more so than with heavy lifting, we want to focus on
movements that are similar to running. Start with more general exercises
and work towards more specific. That means starting with double-support
(two legged) exercises initially before progressing to single leg explosive
exercises. There is a lot of mixed research on what kind of added weight
creates the highest power output, so weight selection is often a problem.
--- PAGE 490 ---
With runners though, it is best to start with a moderate amount of weight
and gradually decrease the amount of weight until it is relatively
lightweight. For many runners this might mean start with doing jump
squats with only the bar and progressing downwards until doing single leg
jumps with a 15-20lb dumbbell. Distance runners do not need to concern
themselves about maximizing power to a large degree with a heavier
external load because of the short amount of time for force development to
occur when running. As mentioned earlier, start with double-support
exercises and progress to single support ones. Some exercises to consider
include squat jumps, split squat jumps, box jumps, and standing long
jumps. Additionally, very steep hill sprints are another way to train for
power, and in a more specific way.
Once again, the total amount of work should be relatively low. 2-4
exercises with 1-2 sets of each exercise should be the general guideline.
The total amount of reps depends on the exercise, as those done with
heavier weights can max out at 4-5 reps, while lighter or no external loads
can have as many as 10-12 reps. The external load should be light and
max out at around 30% Body Weight and can be as low as no external
load. Once again, the training should not be done to failure but instead be
stopped before performance and therefore power drops. The rest between
each rep can be short 30-90 seconds with long rest between sets.
 
Plyometrics
The last addition to our strength training arsenal is the most specific,
plyometrics. For runners plyos are any movement that has the focus of
minimizing ground contact. A whole variety of hops, skips, jumps, and
bounds make up the plyos runners use. These exercises teach the body
how to impart enough force in as short a time as possible, or in other terms
maximizing our rate of force development. Additionally, they help with
utilizing the stretch shortening cycle, the stretch reflex, and therefore
elastic energy storage and return. They represent the last step in converting
the muscular force development into specific running improvements.
Running by itself is a plyometric event. With that in mind, the
volume and complexity of plyos should be kept low as we are already
getting thousands of foot contacts per day running. Additionally, since
--- PAGE 491 ---
running is a plyometric event itself, what’s the best and most specific plyo
to do? Sprinting! The ground contact times are about as low as you can
get, a large amount of force is generated in a very short time, and it is as
specific as you can get.
Additional plyometric exercises can be used as a way to bridge the
gap from power work to sprinting. Remember that with plyos we are
concerned with keeping ground contact short. Because of this and the fact
that distance runners don’t need to train for large eccentric contractions,
don’t use moderate or high box or depth jumps in a plyometric-like way.
Plyo box jumps are different than power box jumps in one crucial factor:
with power box jumps, you simply jump up to the box and then step
down, but with plyo box jumps, the exercise continues so that as soon as
you land on the top of the box, you drop back down to the ground and try
to explode upwards to the top of the box again. This is largely used to train
jumpers how to withstand large amounts of eccentric force and is not as
important in runners. Therefore, stick to simple plyometric exercises such
as the various single or double support hops.
 
Individualization
Once again, individualization plays a large role on what kind of
strength training is done. The same classification system based on fiber
type and event works well with strength training too. In general, the
shorter the event and the more FT, the more strength training takes on
importance. On the other hand, ST or long distance runners can use more
running workouts, such as sprints or steep hill sprints, for their strength
training.
FT runners respond differently to strength training than ST runners.
Generally, they will be a higher responder to muscle size growth due to
the fact that FT fibers are easier to increase in size. Additionally, it is
likely that they will have lower volumes of training to inhibit strength
gains, more likely to be in a positive protein balance, and have higher
levels of anabolic hormones. For these reasons, with FT runners if muscle
size increase is to be avoided, limit the total volume of heavy weight
training of each session and then follow it with a short cool down of
aerobic running. FT runners can also handle a higher load of power and
--- PAGE 492 ---
plyometric training. This is because they generally can handle higher
levels of nervous system fatigue than a ST runner. ST runners generally
should do a lower volume of work per workout and do strength training
less frequently. While a FT runner can strength train 2 to maybe 3 times
per week, ST runners should train once to a max of twice per week when
using the above methods.
Lastly, the exact exercises used for strength training also differ. For
ST runners, more of the strength training can be done through running
specific activities. For example, very steep hill sprints can be used as a
method of power development. From there, the hill steepness can
gradually decrease until the runner does flat sprints. In this way, the
emphasis slowly shifts from power development to a plyometric like
effect.
 
How to Progress and Integrate With Running
Detailing the exact workouts and progressions for strength training
is beyond the scope of this book. Some general guidelines can be given.
As mentioned previously, the running sessions are the most important, and
therefore strength training should solely supplement this work, not take
away from it. If you have never lifted before, start with doing body weight
general strength, perfecting and mastering the technique, and establishing
the motor programming for the lifts.
For this reason, the strength training should be planned to occur so
that it does not interfere with the more important running sessions. That
means planning the strength training so that delayed soreness does not
impact subsequent training. This problem is largely taken care of by
adapting to strength training early in the base phase when there are few
intense running sessions. As a guide, most runners will be fine with 2
strength training workouts per week initially. As the season progresses this
can decrease to one and finally be replaced and maintained entirely
through the maintenance sprint training done during the competition
phase.
As discussed already, the initial phase should consist of a longer
general strength and movement-based program. Once that has been
established the runner can either move towards a neural development
--- PAGE 493 ---
phase or shift into power/plyo. The decision to do heavier/neural training
depends on the athlete’s physiology, level of development, and the goals
for the training. Often with long distance or ST athletes, the neural phase
will be de-emphasized.
When first done, heavier weight lifting can drain runners, as they are
not use to nervous system fatigue. Therefore, heavy training should be
introduced early on in the base when not much other training is done. The
bulk of your heavy training should be done during the base phase where
running intensity is low. As intensity of your running increases, start
decreasing the volume of heavy training and shift towards ballistics/power
training. This is easier to recover from than heavy training. During the late
base phase and early pre-competition phase the power work can be done
using moderate external weight. As the pre-competition phase progresses,
this should shift to more specific power work with a light external load or
no extra weight at all. During the competition phase, plyos should be the
emphasis. Finally when in the middle of peak racing, maintenance plyo
work can be done, or the maintenance sprint work that is done can be used
to maintain the strength adaptations too. During this phase, no heavy
strength training should be done.
Another option is to shift the focus so that the neural strength and
power work can be converted into strength endurance. Essentially, the
neural gains serve as the base for strength endurance, while the power and
plyometric work can be intermixed with endurance work in the form of
circuits.
Just like in running, it’s a good idea to do some sort of maintenance
training with heavy or power work once you transition away from it. This
can be as little as one set of heavy lifting before some power or plyo work
every 3-4 weeks. For power work, hill sprints serve as a great
maintenance, as well as jumps with low or no weight, such as a standing
long jump. Once racing is entering its peak phase, the amount of strength
training should be minimal. For some runners it can be dropped
completely, for others they will need a little stimulus because they are
adapted to it and get flat when it’s not there.
Lastly, I’d like to point out that these ideas on strength training are
not new. Percy Cerutty, who was the eccentric Australian coach of
numerous world-class runners, made use  of heavy training. His most
--- PAGE 494 ---
notable pupil was Gold Medalist Herb Elliott, whom many consider to be
one of the best milers in history. Middle distance star Sebastian Coe was a
firm believer in heavy lifting, strength circuits, and plyometric training.
According to his strength coach, George Gandy, Coe would develop to
where he could complete 2 sets of 5x full squats at 1.5x his body weight.
George Gandy has gone on to coach many of Great Britain’s top distance
runners including 1500m runner Lisa Dobriskey and holds on to these
strength training beliefs. He has stated that what he wants out of strength
training is the same thing that sprinters or throwers want; his point is that
power matters. These are just a few examples of world-class coaches and
athletes utilizing similar strength training paradigms with success. The
information has just been slow to reach the masses.
 
Strength Training Sample Progression and
Plan
Why High Rep Low Weight Training Doesn’t
Make Sense
--- PAGE 495 ---
The majority of high rep, low weight training is done in a way to
isolate a muscle or a group of muscles to enhance muscular endurance.
The problem with this is if we think back to the fatigue models of
exercise, fatigue does not happen on an isolated level. It is an integrated
process whether you believe that fatigue happens directly on a muscular
level or indirectly via central nervous system control.
When training a muscle with the high rep method, the benefits are
largely local muscular endurance, meaning endurance of that specific
muscle recruited in that specific way. There is very little transfer of local
muscular endurance to a dynamic activity like running for several reasons,
including the fact that muscle activation and recruitment is vastly
different. Additionally, isolated local muscle fatigue causes fatigue in a
different way than when fatigue occurs during a dynamic activity like
running. So, it is essentially training to resist fatigue that will not occur
when running.
High repetition work can be beneficial when combined in strength
endurance circuits. This happens because the strength exercises are
causing some level of local fatigue and then immediately the specific
activity of running is done. In this way, the strength works to create a low
level of pre-fatigue to ensure that more fibers are trained for endurance
during the actual running portion that follows.
 
Arms and Core
For the arms, training should not be the heavy strength training, but
rather as general maintenance in the form of body weight or light
exercises for general strength such as push ups and dips, or simple
medicine ball tosses. The reason is that we are not trying to develop force
development with the arms. They are simply there to assist the legs in
movement and provide counter balance.
Core training has reached fad level. The reality is that core does not
mean abs and is a nebulous term. For our purposes it will refer to the
entire torso and connection to the legs. There are many problems
associated with core training. First, the core does not function in isolation,
yet most try to use isolation movements to train the core. When isolated,
the muscles of the core function in an entirely different way than during
--- PAGE 496 ---
running or any dynamic activity. During running, the core functions as a
connector between the upper and lower body, a stabilizer, and it aids in
energy transfer. Many coaches or trainers have taught the idea of bracing
the core during exercise. When this is done, breathing can be impaired as
the lower part of the diaphragm cannot enlarge, and rotation is impeded.
While a large amount of rotation of the trunk is not wanted, there has to be
a small amount of rotation to compensate for the forward/backward
motion of the opposite arms and/or legs. The idea of drawing the spine in
or bracing creates an unnatural and machine-like running style.
Additionally, it causes co-contraction, which would decrease efficiency
while running.
Stability is another issue. For a long time, there was a search for the
most important stabilizing muscle. Unfortunately, the body does not
function in isolation. The trunk is stabilized by a whole myriad of different
muscles, and the degree that each muscle type functions as a spine/trunk
stabilizer changes depending on the exercise.
One other popular argument for the core is that a strong core
prevents an athlete’s form from breaking down. The problem with that
logic is that core muscles are not what is fatiguing when racing. The
breakdown of form is a symptom of fatigue and happens as a result of
fatigue elsewhere. The runner tries to compensate for or fight the fatigue
by making changes in their stride, either consciously or subconsciously.
For instance, if stride length starts to decrease, you often see over
swinging of the arm stroke. Are the arms fatigued? No, the runner is just
trying to compensate. This can also be seen with the forward or backward
lean during heavy fatigue. Is the runner’s back fatiguing so much that he
can’t keep upright during the final 100m of the race when so many runners
lean back? No, he’s just trying to compensate for reduced stride length
and/or frequency. To combat form breakdown, we have to learn how to
deal with fatigue and learn to stay relaxed, not fight it, and above all don’t
compensate. Ironically, most of the time, it is trying too hard that causes
form breakdown.
Last but not least is the question of how to train the core. My belief
is that a little goes a long way. Even when running, the so-called core
muscles work at a low level for a prolonged time. The best way to train
the core for the event is probably through running at various speeds.
--- PAGE 497 ---
Research by Behm, Cappa, & Power (2009) supports this idea, as the level
of muscle activation of certain core muscles was higher when running than
with traditional core exercises. Additionally, full body movements seem to
train the core better than traditional crunches or planks to a large degree.
In particular the strength training already discussed does a good job. The
heavier training increases core strength, while the power and plyometric
work trains the core to work reactively and absorb and transfer energy. In
another set of studies, it was found that full body exercises such as squats
and dead lifts provided much higher muscle activation than traditional
core work such as crunches, back extensions, planks, and stability ball
work.
The use of stability training or unstable devices such as bosu balls or
swiss balls have become en vogue in core training. Training on unstable
surfaces challenges balance and proprioception, which is a good thing, but
it also causes some problems. First off, training on an unstable surface
increases the activation of the antagonist (the opposing) muscle. What this
means is that the muscle working directly opposite of the muscle that is
doing the work is activated. This obviously isn’t a desired outcome as it is
in effect working against what you are trying to do. Essentially, this co-
contraction is like driving with the parking brake on. Second, when
performing unstable training, improper muscle recruitment patterns are
established. This is particularly true when performing weighted exercises
on an unstable platform. As mentioned earlier, doing exercises on an
unstable surface does not increase muscle activity compared to doing the
same exercise on a stable surface. Several studies have found that for a
variety of core exercises ranging from full body movement lifting to
traditional core activities like back extensions, muscle activation of the
working muscles is decreased when done on an unstable surface compared
to on a stable one. As mentioned before, antagonist muscle activity is
increased, which proponents of unstable training sometimes cite as
additional muscle activity, neglecting to disclose that we don’t want that
kind of additional muscle activity when training. Leave the unstable
training for balance, proprioception, and pre-habilitation training. Keep it
away from your standard strength training.
What this practically means is that functional full body movements
are the way to train the core. This can be either be done through heavy
--- PAGE 498 ---
weight lifting such as that described earlier, or by lower general strength
full body workouts and circuits. Exercises such as various lunges, body
squats, and rotational and reactive medicine ball work fit the bill. Planks
and other such stabilizing exercisers can be used as a sort of maintenance
core work. With core, a little goes a long way. I’ve found that many
runners can be fine with almost no additional specific training aimed at the
core, while others are fine with 2-3x a week of about 20 minutes worth of
work. After all of this discussion, it’s important to remember that the
“core” is activated and trained while running to a larger degree than with
many core exercises.
The takeaway message is that while core training and even lifting
can be beneficial they are not the most important part of the training. They
are called supplemental training. Do not give them more attention than
they deserve. This doesn’t mean you shouldn’t do them; it just means to
prioritize and focus on the running first and add in the additional stressors
as they can be handled.
--- PAGE 499 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 501 ---
22
--- PAGE 502 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 503 ---
The Biomechanics of Running
“Too much concern about how well one is doing in a task sometimes
disrupts performance by loading short-term memory with pointless anxious
thoughts.” Daniel Kahneman
 
Distance runners and coaches seem to hate the topic of running
form. Most subscribe to the idea that a runner will naturally find his best
stride and that stride should not be changed. However, just like throwing a
baseball or shooting a basketball, running is a skill that must be learned.
The problem with learning how to run is that there are so many wrong
ideas out there. This is partly due to the complexity of the process and
partly due to a lack of understanding of biomechanics. It’s my belief that
the wide range of “correct” ways to run has led to this apathetic attitude
towards running form changes by most athletes and coaches. Instead of
being dogmatic that there is one way to run, the goal here is to provide a
model. Not unlike what we did in creating event race models, we should
take this generalized model and fit it around the individual variation of our
runners.
The argument that running is a natural movement that should not be
corrected is easy to dispel. First, we know that even simple outside
influences such as what running shoe you wear impacts gait dramatically.
In a society where we grow up wearing shoes from a young age and spend
most of our time walking around on man-made surfaces, it is a stretch to
think that a decade or more of living in this way does not change our
mechanics. Second, if we look at the fields of motor control and motor
learning more evidence can be seen. In learning movement we often learn
by imitation of what we see and from sensory feedback. Since most
people aren’t taking their kids to see world class runners at track meets,
we are stuck with seeing the “joggers” in the neighborhood or horribly
running players in more popular sports, such as baseball, as our childhood
running models. The second method of motor learning is done by using
feedback. A simple example of this is learning not to touch something hot.
The first time a child puts his hand on the hot stove, he learns quickly that
that wasn’t a good idea. Similarly, if a child develops correctly, he would
quickly learn that landing heel first when running is not a good idea. It
--- PAGE 504 ---
hurts to over stride and slam your heel down into the ground when
running barefoot. But since we grow up wearing heavily cushioned shoes,
the cushioning eliminates this negative feedback. There is no longer a
consequence for heel striking, so why should we avoid it?
Lastly, motor control studies provide some interesting insights. In
comparing the controlling mechanisms of running and walking in humans
and animals, some interesting differences are apparent. In animals such as
cats, control at the spinal cord level plays a much larger part than in
humans (Duysens & Van de Crommert, 1998). In animals that have spinal
lesions, they can regain much of their gait functioning when trained on a
treadmill, while humans with spinal lesions can only partially mimic the
walking motion. The thought behind this is that humans rely more on a
mixture of higher-level control in the brain and lower level control in the
spinal cord than animals do. Some have hypothesized that this means that
animal gaits are more reflexive and therefore naturally or instinctually
ingrained than humans who rely more on higher level brain control.
The benefits of changing form are enormous. As discussed in the
Science section of this book, changes in mechanics can enhance
efficiency. Additionally, running correctly can reduce the injury risk, and,
perhaps most importantly, increase basic speed. What I’ve found is that
many distance runners who say they have no speed in reality just don’t
know how to use their natural speed. They never learned how to sprint
correctly, so it is their mechanics holding them back not their speed. The
goal of this section is to outline what proper running form is and note
some of the common misconceptions. Unlike most methods of running,
the following is based on research, science, observation, and practical
experience. It is based on the system that world-renowned biomechanics
expert and sprint coach Tom Tellez has used for many years in developing
gold medalist and world record setting runners, and I am much indebted
for the information he provided.
For practical reasons, coaches and scientists separate the running
stride into various phases. While this is needed so that the idea can be
conceptualized it often promotes a fragmented approach to learning proper
biomechanics. Instead, a whole body integrated approach is needed.
Looking at the body as a whole is required because of how the body
interacts. Every so called phase impacts the next phase, and the movement
--- PAGE 505 ---
of one body segment impacts completely different body segments. When
looking at running form from a segmented point of view, we are relying
on the principle that each segment works in isolation, and that is simply
not true. Therefore, while breaking the stride into phases allows for better
descriptive ability, when looking at how we function when running it is
best to look at how the body interacts as a whole.
 
How to Run
To go through the entire running cycle, we’ll start with when foot
contact is made and go through the full stride. Foot contact should occur
on the outside edge of the foot and depending on speed either at the mid-
foot or forefoot. The initial contact on the outside of the foot is generally
not felt and instead for practical reasons should be thought of as a simple
mid/whole foot landing. Contrary to what most people believe, initial foot
contact should not occur on the heel even when running slow. As
discussed in the Science section of this book, heel strike results in a higher
braking force, reduced elastic energy storage, and a prolonged ground
contact. By hitting forefoot or mid-foot the braking action is minimized,
and the initial impact peak is reduced. Additionally, the landing should
occur in a neutral position at the ankle, as that sets up the calf and Achilles
for optimal use of elastic energy. Once landing has occurred, it is
important to allow the foot to load up. Often, the mistake is made in trying
to get the foot off the ground as quickly as possible, but remember that it
is only when the foot is on the ground that force is transferred into the
ground. While having a short ground contact time is beneficial, it should
be a result of transferring force faster and not of getting quick with the
foot. Loading up the foot means allowing it to move through the cycle of
initial contact to fully supporting the body. Since initial contact is on the
outside of the foot, the support will move inwardly. With forefoot strikers,
the heel has to settle back and touch the ground to allow for proper
loading of the Achilles and calf complex. Holding the heel off the ground
and staying on the forefoot will not allow for the stretch reflex on the
Achilles-calf complex to occur.
After the initial loading phase, propulsion starts to occur and the foot
begins to come off the ground. The center of pressure should move
--- PAGE 506 ---
forwards with the big toe acting as a locking mechanism before the foot
leaves the ground. This locking ensures that the foot acts as one entire
unit, allowing for greater propulsion. Unlike what many suggest, do not
try to get any extra propulsion out of pushing off with the toes
consciously. It is too late in the running cycle to net any forward
propulsion and will result in simply making your stride flatter. Instead, the
forward propulsion should come from the hip, and the foot should be
thought of as being along for the ride, which we will discuss shortly.
Essentially, once the hip is extended, leave the foot alone.
During this entire process, the calf and Achilles tendon can utilize
the stretch shortening cycle and stretch reflex phenomenon. Upon foot
contact the Achilles-calf complex goes from a neutral position to fully
stretched upon mid-stance to fully contracted upon toe off. This cycle
allows for energy storage upon ground impact and release upon take off.
In essence, the complex acts like a spring as it stores energy that comes
with ground contact and then releases it when ground contact is broken. A
common mistake is to stay too high up on the balls of the feet and never
let the heel touch the ground. When this occurs, the Achilles-calf complex
is not fully stretched and thus you are losing out on the elastic energy
return. Similarly, if a runner is too quick with the foot, meaning they try to
rush it off the ground, elastic energy is lost because the foot and Achilles
were not properly allowed to store and the release energy. Likewise, the
arch in the foot also stores elastic energy as it is initially compressed and
then subsequently rebounds. This mechanism happens because of its
elastic properties.
While foot contact is occurring, the emphasis in your mechanics
should shift to the hip. The extension of the hip is where the power comes
from, not from pushing with your toes or other mechanisms that are
commonly cited. The hip should be thought to work in a crank-like or
piston-like fashion. The speed and degree of hip extension is what will
partially control the speed. A stronger hip extension results in more force
application and greater speed, thus how powerfully and rapidly the hip is
extended helps to control the running speed. Once the hip is extended, the
foot will come off the ground, and the recovery cycle will begin.
In coming off the ground you are trying to optimize the vertical and
horizontal component of the stride. If you think too much horizontally,
--- PAGE 507 ---
you will flatten out and not come off the ground, thus losing airtime and
stride length. If you think too much vertically, you will be high up in the
air for too long and almost bounce along, not having a very big stride
length. Thus it is important to optimize the angle and extend the hip so
that you have a slight bounce in your stride. A good cue for this is to look
at the horizon. If it stays flat, you are too horizontal. If it bounces a lot,
you are too vertical. The best analogy is to think back to your High School
physics class and remember how to get the greatest distance when firing a
cannon ball. The angle has to be optimized, not minimized.
          Once the hip has extended, the recovery phase starts. When
the hip is extended correctly, it will result in the working of a stretch
reflex mechanism. This is best thought of as a sling shot where you stretch
the sling shot back and then let it go. The result will be that it shoots
forward very rapidly. The hip works in much the same way. If you extend
the hip you are putting it in a stretch position. With the slingshot, if
instead of letting it go, you tried to move it forward, the sling shot band
would come forward much more slowly. The same applies for the hip.
With the combination of the stretch reflex and the basic passive
mechanical properties of the lower leg, the recovery cycle of the leg will
happen automatically. The lower leg will lift off the ground and fold so
that it comes close to your buttocks (how close depends on the speed you
are running) then pass under your hips with the knee leading. Once the
knee has led through, the lower leg will unfold and it is then the runner’s
job to put it down underneath them. Ideal landing is close to the center of
your body and directly underneath the knee.
Trying to actively move the leg through the recovery phase is
another common mistake and will only result in wasted energy and a
slower cycling of the leg through the recovery phase. Two other common
mistakes are to try to lift the knees at the end of the recovery cycle and to
kick the lower leg to the butt at the beginning of the recovery cycle.
Neither idea is sound, as they are essentially like trying to push the sling
shot forward in our analogy instead of just letting it go. Active lifting of
the knee lengthens the recovery cycle with no added stride length benefits.
Instead, the knee should be allowed to cycle through and lift on its own. It
should not be forced upwards because that cycle through of the knee is a
result of the stretch reflex. Similarly, pulling the lower leg to the butt
--- PAGE 508 ---
simply wastes energy, as the hamstrings have to be put to work in doing
this action. Instead, the folding up of the leg should be thought of as a
passive activity. How close the lower leg comes to the butt depends on the
amount of hip extension.
This phenomenon may seem strange and is sometimes a hard
concept to grasp. After all, who has the patience to not do anything during
the recovery phase? But research has demonstrated that both muscle
activity during the recovery phase and energy use (the recovery phase
only uses 15% of the whole stride’s energy) show that the leg is largely
cycling through entirely because of reflex-like phenomena and passive
mechanics.
Research on patients with spinal lesions has demonstrated the effect
of the stretch reflex and passive dynamics on gait. Even though the
patients have lost the use of their lower legs, if put on a treadmill their
legs will work in walking motion as long as hip extension is initiated by
someone. If a therapist simply manually extends the hip and then lets it
go, the leg will have a slight folding up as it cycles forward automatically.
The forward movement and folding up of the leg is a result of the stretch
reflex on the hip and passive mechanics. The fact that the leg folds up
slightly at all shows that it is a simple mechanical issue and does not occur
due to active muscle contraction. As a simple experiment, play around
with a simple two-jointed object, pushing the top joint forward and see
what the lower joint segment does. If it’s moving forward at sufficient
velocity, it’s going to fold up because of simple physics and mechanics.
Once the knee has cycled through, the lower leg should drop to the
ground so that it hits underneath your knee and close to your center of
gravity. When foot contact is made, it should be made where the lower leg
is 90 degrees to the ground. This puts it in optimal position for force
production. The leg does not extend outwards like is seen in most joggers,
and there is no reaching for the ground. Reaching out with the lower leg
results in over striding and creates a braking action. Another common
mistake is people extending the lower leg out slightly and then pulling it
back in a paw like action before ground contact. In using this paw back
technique, the idea is to try to get quick with the foot and create a negative
acceleration. This is incorrect and does not lead to shorter ground contact
times or better positioning for force production. Instead the paw back
--- PAGE 509 ---
motion simply engages the hamstrings and other muscles to a greater
degree than necessary, thus wasting energy. The leg should simply unfold
and drop underneath the runner.
This paw back phenomenon was originally taught because of the
idea of trying to create backwards acceleration. This concept does not hold
up as the braking forces are still the same upon foot contact. Moreover, the
paw back was created through misinterpretation of scientific data.
Coaches saw that the hamstrings were active during the latter portion of
the in flight recovery phase and assumed that meant the hamstrings were
contracting, thus pulling the lower leg back. Instead, the hamstrings were
active due to stiffening the muscle-tendon unit in preparation for ground
contact and in aiding the slow down of the unfolding of the lower leg. The
muscle stiffness manipulation occurs for two reasons; first to absorb
elastic energy as a stiff system can utilize elastic energy better, and second
because of a process called muscle tuning. Muscle tuning is the body’s
way of preparing for landing. In essence it acts as an in built cushioning
system to minimize the muscle vibrations that occur during landing. The
body uses feedback and sensory information to tune the cushioning so that
ground reaction forces are essentially the same whether in a cushioned
shoe or when running barefoot. When running barefoot, muscle tuning
takes place so that the in built cushioning can absorb more of the force.
So far we have only talked about the lower body, but the lower and
upper body are linked together as one unit. The interaction between the
upper and lower body plays a very large role. First, you should run with an
upright body posture with a very slight lean forward from the ground, not
from the waist. The arms and legs should work in a coordinated fashion.
When the left leg is forward, the right arm should be forward and vice
versa for the left arm and leg. But it goes beyond just the arms and legs
working in opposition; when they both stop, forward and backward
motion is also coordinated. When the arm stops moving forward and is
about to reverse direction, the opposite leg should reach its maximum
knee height before starting its downward movement. Similarly, when the
arm reaches its maximum backward movement before switching
directions and coming forward, the opposite leg and hip should be at their
maximum extension backwards.
--- PAGE 510 ---
 The arm swing occurs from the shoulders, so that the shoulders do
not turn or sway. It is a simple pendulum-like forward and backward
motion without shoulder sway or the crossing of the arms in front of your
body. On the forward upswing the arm angle should decrease slightly with
the hands in a relaxed fist. On the backswing they should swing back to
just above and behind your hip joint for most running speeds. As the
running speed increases, the arm will swing back more, eventually
culminating in going back and upwards in sprinting.
The integration of the arms and legs is crucial. Often we see
something happening with the leg that is incorrect and immediately work
on fixing the problem by adjusting how that particular leg is working. For
example, if an athlete extends out with the lower leg, we immediately try
to correct them by having them put their foot down sooner. Instead, the
problem seen with the leg could simply be the symptom. The real cause
could be in the arm swing. A delayed arm swing or a swing with a hitch in
it causes a delay or hitch in the opposite lower leg. If you watch someone
run, the arms and legs are timed up so they work perfectly in synch. If the
runner has a problem with their arm swing that causes a delay in the
typical forward and backward motion, such as turning it inwards or
shoulder rotation, then the opposite leg must compensate for this delay. In
many cases, the opposite leg extends outwards as a form of compensation.
Therefore, it is important to look at the whole body and understand that
the arms and legs are synched together and interact, so a problem in one of
them may simply be a way of compensating. We need to figure out if the
issue in the arm or leg movement is coming from that spot or if it is a
result of the body attempting to counterbalance itself.
 
Summary of Running Form:
1. Body Position- upright, slight lean from ground. Head and face
relaxed.
2. Feet- As soon as knee comes through put the foot down
underneath you. Land mid or forefoot underneath knee, close to center of
the body.
3. Arm stroke- controls rhythm, Movement from the shoulder
without side to side rotation
--- PAGE 511 ---
4. Hip extension- extend the hip and then leave it alone.
5. Rhythm- Control rhythm and speed through arm stroke and hip
extension.
Changing Your Mechanics
Knowing how to run is one thing, but how do you go about
changing running form. One popular method is to break the running stride
into segments and do drills to improve that segment. However, this
method does not work well. If you recall, each part of the running cycle
impacts the next. The body works as a whole, not as a bunch of different
segments. When drills are used, they may mimic visually what happens
when running, but that is all. Due to doing drills in isolation, the muscle
fiber recruitment pattern is much different. There is little contribution of
the stretch reflex, the stretch shortening cycle, or elastic energy storage
and return. An example would be the use of butt kicks. When doing the
drill, the lower leg kicking to the butt is accomplished by contracting the
hamstring. When the lower leg coils up towards the butt when actually
running, it’s a result of the hip extension and some stretch reflex, among
other contributors. Therefore, the drill has very little actual transfer to the
actual running. For this reason, drills are not as useful for improving
mechanics because they do not replicate the running form
biomechanically, neurally, or muscle recruitment wise. Instead, running
form should be worked on when actually running.
To accomplish this, cues are provided to the runner. A cue is a
simple task to focus on while running. Possible examples including
putting the feet down, dropping the foot beneath you, extend the hip, or
any other cue that helps reinforce proper running technique. What cues are
used depends on what problem needs to be corrected. The athlete should
focus on one or two possible cues at a time so that they do not get
overwhelmed. The goal is to ingrain proper running form to the point
where they no longer need the cues.
The process of using cues is simple and consists of a trial and error
method. The first step is to identify what is wrong with a runner’s stride
and then figure out how to change it. This will help identify what cue to
focus on. Sometimes when giving cues it helps to overemphasize the
point, such as telling a runner to feel like they are putting their feet down
--- PAGE 512 ---
behind them when correcting foot strike. Since “normal” is incorrect, such
as reaching out and heel striking in this example, sometimes
overcorrecting is necessary initially.
The athlete should do short strides focusing on one cue at a time.
Each stride should be video recorded or analyzed by the coach. If after a
cue is given, the runner makes a positive change in the running form, then
that cue is successful for that athlete, and they should focus on that cue
until it becomes ingrained. If that particular cue does not result in the
desired change, the coach should come up with a slightly different cue,
essentially a different way of communicating the desired effect. All
runners will respond to a cue slightly differently; that is why it is
important to come up with several different ways to say the same thing.
An example of several different cues to tell a runner who needs to switch
from heel striking to a flat foot or mid-foot strike are: put your feet down
underneath you; put your feet down behind you; drop the foot as soon as
the knee stops going up; when the knee comes through start thinking foot
down; feel choppy with your stride.
Once a successful cue is found, then the goal is to ingrain that
running style. To do this, start slowly. For distance runners, have the
athlete focus for short periods of times during distance runs. Breaking it
down into short segments of focusing on form does not make the task feel
as daunting for a distance runner. Additionally, during aerobic intervals or
rhythm work, have a few intervals where the focus is on running correctly,
regardless of time. Also, use strides before or after workouts as a means of
getting in some extra form work time to ingrain good mechanics. The last
step is transitioning those changes to stressful situations. When running
under stress, such as in a race, we tend to revert back to old habits. Having
the focus of running with good mechanics during low key competitions or
during a time trial setting is a good way to start this transition. As long as
it is gradually and consistently worked on, changes in running form can
happen. The key is to make gradual changes and to prepare for the
alterations in form by conditioning your body. For example, if foot strike
is to change, we need to make sure that the surrounding musculature is
ready for this change in shock absorption duties. After all, we don’t want
to simply switch our form to one where a muscle is used to a higher
degree than before without preparing that muscle for the increased load.
--- PAGE 513 ---
 
 
--- PAGE 514 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 516 ---
Appendix
Specific Endurance Workout progression
examples:

--- PAGE 518 ---
 
--- PAGE 519 ---
 
--- PAGE 520 ---
 
--- PAGE 521 ---
 
--- PAGE 524 ---
 
 
 
--- PAGE 525 ---
 
--- PAGE 526 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 528 ---
 
--- PAGE 530 ---
Aaron, E. A., Seow, K. C., Johnson, B. D., & Dempsey, J. A. (1992). Oxygen cost of exercise
hyperpnea: implications for performance. J Appl Physiol, 72, 1818–25.
Abernethy, P. J., Thayer, R., & Taylor, A. W. (1990). Acute and chronic responses of skeletal muscle
to endurance and sprint exercise. A review. Sports Med, 10(6), 365–389.
Acevedo, E. O., & Goldfarb, A. H. (1989). Increased training intensity effects on plasma lactate,
ventilatory threshold and endurance. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 21, 563–568.
American College of Sports Medicine. (2009). American College of Sports Medicine position stand.
Progression models in resistance training for healthy adults. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 41(3),
687–708.
Ando, S., Kokubu, M., Nakae, S., Kimura, M., Hojo, T. & Ebine, N. (2012). Effects of strenuous
exercise on visual perception are independent of visual resolution. Physiol Behav. 106
Ardigo, L. P., Lafortuna, C., Minetti, A. E., Montgoni, P., & Saibene, F. (1995). Metabolic and
mechanical aspects of foot landing type, forefoot and rearfoot strike, in human running. Acta
Physiol Scan, 155(1), 17–22.
Arellano, C.J. & Kram, R. (2011). The effects of step width and arm swing on energetic cost and
lateral balance during running. J Biomech, 44(7), 1291-5.
Arellano, C. J. & Kram, R. (2012). The energetic cost of maintaining lateral balance during human
running. J Appl Physiol. 112, 427-434.
Baden, D. A, McLean, T. L., Tucker, R., Noakes, T. D., & St Clair Gibson, A. (2005). Effect of
anticipation during unknown or unexpected exercise duration on ratings of perceived
exertion, affect, and physiological function. Br J Sports Med, 39(1), 742–746.
Basset, F. A., & Boulay, M. R. (2000). Specificity of treadmill and cycle ergometer tests in triathletes,
runners and cyclists. Eur J Appl Physiol, 81(3), 214–221.
Bassett, D. R. & Howley, E. T. (1997). Maximal oxygen uptake: ‘classical’ versus ‘contemporary’
viewpoints. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 29, 591–603.
--- PAGE 531 ---
Bassett, D. R. & Howley, E. T. (2000). Limiting factors for maximum oxygen uptake and
determinants of endurance performance. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 32,
70–84
Beall, C. M., Decker, M. J., Brittenham, G. M., Kushner, I., Gebremedhin, A. & Strohl, K. P. (2002).
An Ethiopian pattern of human adaptation to high-altitude hypoxia. Proc Natl Acad Sci,
99(26), 17215–17218.
Bebout, D. E., Hogan, M. C., Hempleman, S. C., & Wagner, P. D. (1993). Effects of training and
immobilization of O2 and DO2 in dog gastrocnemius in situ. J Appl Physiol, 74, 1697–1703.
Belli, A. & Hintzy, F. (2002). Influence of pedaling rate on the energy cost of cycling in humans. Eur
J Appl Physiol, 88, 158–162.
--- PAGE 532 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 533 ---
Bentley, D. J., Roels, B., Thomas, C., Ives, R., Mercier, J., Millet, G., & Cameron-Smith, D. (2009).
The relationship between mono-carboxylate transporters 1 and 4 expression in skeletal
muscle and endurance performance in athletes. Eur J Appl Physiol, 106(3), 465–471.
 
Beneke, R., Hutler, M., & Leithauser, R. (2000). Maximal lactate steady-state independent of
performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 32(6), 1135–1139
Berg, K. (2003). Endurance training and performance in runners. Sports Med, 33(1), 59–73
Bickham, D. C., Bentley, D. J., Le Rossignol, P. F., & Cameron-Smith, D. (2006). The effects of
short-term sprint training on MCT expression in moderately endurance trained runners. Eur J
Appl Physiol, 96, 636–643.
Billat, L. V., (2001). Interval training for performance: A scientific and empirical practice. Special
recommendations for middle and long-distance running. Part II: Anaerobic interval training.
Sports Med, 31(2), 75–90.
Billat, L., Sirvent, P., Lepretre, P. M., & Koralsztein, J. P. (2004). Training effect on performance,
substrate balance and blood lactate concentration at maximal lactate steady state in masters
endurance runners. Pflugers Arch, 447, 875–883.
Billat, V. L., Fletchet, B., Petit, B., Muriaux, G., & Koralsztein, J. P. (1999). Interval training at
VO2max effects on aerobic performance and overtraining markers. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 31,
156–163.
Billat, V., Demarle, A., Paiva, M., & Koralsztein, J. P. (2002). Effect of training on the physiological
factors of performance in elite marathon runners. Int J Sports Med, 23, 335–341.
Billat, V., Leptretre, P. M., Heugas, A. M., Laurence, M. H., Saijm, D., & Koralsztein, J. P. (2003).
Bioenergetic characteristics in elite male and female Kenyan runners. Med Sci Sports Exerc,
35(2), 297–304.
--- PAGE 534 ---
Billat, V., Sirvent, P., Py, G., Koralsztein, J. P., & Mercier, J. (2003). The Concept of Maximal
Lactate Steady State A Bridge Between Biochemistry, Physiology and Sport Science. Sports
Med, 33(6), 407–426.
Bishop, D., Jenkins, D. G., McEniery, M., & Carey, M. F. (2000). Relationship between plasma
lactate parameters and muscle characteristics in female cyclists. –
Bompa, T. 0., & Haff, G. G. (2008). Periodization: Theory and methodology of training. Champaign,
IL: Human Kinetics.
Bonacci, J., Chapman, A., Blanch, P., & Vicenzino, B. (2009) Neuromuscular Adaptations to
Training, Injury and Passive Interventions: Implications for Running Economy. Sports Med,
39(11), 903–921.
Bridge, M. W., Weller, A.S., Rayson, M. & Jones, D.A. (2003). Responses to exercise in the heat
related to measures of hypothalamic serotonergic and dopaminergic function. Eur J Appl
Physiol. 89(5):451–9.
 
Brooks, G. A., Fahey, T. D., & Baldwin, K. (2004). Exercise Physiology: Human bioenergetics and
its application. McGraw-Hill.
Brooks, G. A., & Mercier, J. (1994). Balance of carbohydrate and lipid utilization during exercise:
the “crossover” concept. J Appl Physiol, 76(6), 2253-2261.
Buick, F. J., Gledhill, N., Froese, A. B., Spriet, L., & Meyers, E. C. (1980). Effect of induced
erythrocythemia on aerobic work capacity. J Appl Physiol, 48(4), 636–642.
Bulbulian, R., Wilcox, A. R., & Darabos, B. L. (1986). Anaerobic contribution to distance running
performance of trained crosscountry athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 18, 107–113.
Busson, T. (2003). Variable dose-response relationship between exercise training and performance.
Med Sci Sports Exerc, 35(7), 1188–1195.
Calbet, J. A., Boushel, R., Radegran, G., Sondergaard, H., Wagner, P. D., & Saltin, B. (2003).
Determinants of maximal oxygen uptake in severe acute hypoxia. Am J Physiol Regul Integr
--- PAGE 535 ---
Comp Physiol, 284(2), 291–303.
Calbet, J. A., Lundby, C., Koskolou, M., & Boushel, R. (2006). Importance of hemoglobin
concentration to exercise: acute manipulations. Respir Physiol Nerubiol, 151(2-3), 132–140.
Canova, R., & Arcelli, E. (1999). Marathon training: A scientific approach. Rome: Marchesi
Grafiche Editoriali.
Cappellini, G., Ivanenko, Y. P., Poppele, R. E., & Lacquaniti, F. (2006). Motor patterns in human
walking and running. J Neurophusiol, 95(6), 3426–3437.
Castle, P. C., Maxwell, N., Allchorn, A., Mauger, A. R., & White, D. K. (2012). Deception of ambient
and body core temperature improves self paced cycling in hot, humid conditions. European
Journal of Applied Physiology. 112(1), 377-385.
Cavanagh, P. R., & Williams, K. R. (1982). The effect of stride length variation on oxygen uptake
during distance running. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 14(1), 30–35.
Chang, Y. H. & Kram, R. (1999). Metabolic cost of generating horizontal forces during human
running. J Appl Physiol, 86(5). 1657-62
Chapman, A. R., Vicenzino, B., Blanch, P., & Hodges, P. W. (2008). Patterns of leg muscle
recruitment vary between novice and highly trained cyclists. J Electromyogr Kinesiol, 18,
359–371.
Chapman, R., Stray-Gunderson, J., & Levine, B. D. (1998). Individual variation in response to
altitude training. J. Appl. Physiol, 85(4), 1448–1456.
Coe, P., & Martin, D. (1997). Better Training for Distance Runners. Champaign, IL: Human
Kinetics.
Coffey, V. G. & Hawley, J. A. (2007). The Molecular Bases of Training Adaptation . Sports Medicine,
37(9), 737-763.
Conley, D. L., & Krahenbuhl, G. S. (1980). Running economy and distance running performance of
highly trained athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc., 12(5), 357–60.
--- PAGE 536 ---
Costill, D. (1967). The relationship between selected physiological variables and distance running
performance. J Sports Med Phys Fitness, 7, 61–66.
Costill, D., & Trappe, S. (2002). Running: The athlete within. Traverse City, MI: Cooper Publishing
Group.
Coyle, E, F., Martin, W. H., Bloomfield, S. A., Lowry, O. H., & Holloszy, J. O. (1985) Effects of
detraining on responses to submaximal exercise. Journal of Applied Physiology,59, 853–859.
Coyle, E. F. & Joyner, M. J. (2008). Endurance exercise performance: the physiology of champions.
586, 35–44.
Coyle, E. F., & Holloszy, J. O. (1995). Integration of the physiological factors determining endurance
performance ability. Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, Baltimore, MD: Williams &
Wilkins, pg. 25–63.
Coyle, E. F., Sidossis, L. S., Horowitz, J. F., & Beltz, J. D. (1992). Cycling efficiency is related to the
percentage of type I muscle fibres. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 24, 782–
788.
Creer, A. R., Ricard, M. D., Conlee, R. K., Hoyt, G. L, & Parcell, A. C. (2004). Neural, metabolic,
and performance adaptations to four weeks of high intensity sprint-interval training in trained
cyclists. International Journal of Sports Medicine, 25, 92–98.
Czerwinski, S.M., Martin, J.M., and Bechtel, P.J. 1994. Modulation of IGF mRNA abundance during
stretch-induced skeletal muscle hypertrophy and regression. J Appl Physiol 76, 2026–2030.
Dallam, G. M., Wilber, R. L., Jadelis, K., Fletcher, G., & Romanov, N. (2005). Effect of a global
alteration of running technique on kinematics and economy. J Sports Sci, 23(7), 757–764.
Dalleau, G., Belli, A., Bourdin, M., & Lacour, J. R. (1998). The spring-mass model and the energy
cost of treadmill running. Eur J Appl Physiol, 77, 257–63.
Dalleck, L. C., Kravitz, L., & Robergs, R. A. (2004). Maximal exercise testing using the elliptical
cross-trainer and treadmill. Journal of the Exercise Physiology, 7(3), 94–101.
Daniels, J. (2005). Running Formula. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
--- PAGE 537 ---
Daniels, J. T., Yarbrough, R. A., & Foster, C. (1978). Changes in VO2max and running performance
with training. Eur J Appl Physiol, 39, 249–54.
De Koning JJ, Foster C, Bakkum A, Kloppenburg S, Thiel C, et al. (2011) Regulation of Pacing
Strategy during Athletic Competition. PLoS ONE 6(1).
De Morree, H.M., Klein, C., & Marcora SM (2012). Perception of effort reflects central motor
command during movement execution. Psychophysiology, 49(9): 1242-53.
Dempsey, J. A., & Wagner, P. D. (1999). Exercise-induced arterial hypoxemia. J Appl Physiol, 87(6),
1997–2006.
Dempsey, J. A., Hanson, P., & Henderson, K. (1984). Exercise-induced arterial hypoxemia in healthy
humans at sea-level. Journal of Physiology (London), 355, 161–175.
Dery, M. C., Michaud, M. D., Richard, D. E. (2005). Hypoxia-inducible factor 1: regulation by
hypoxic and non-hypoxic activators. The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell
Biology, 37, 535–540.
Duffield, R., Dawson, B., & Goodman, C. (2005). Energy system contribution to 1500- and 3000-
metre track running. J Sports Sci, 23(10), 993–1002.
Duysens, J. & Van de Crommert, H. W. (1998). Neural control of locomotion; Part 1: The central
pattern generator from cats to humans. Gait & Posture, 7(2), 131–141.
Ekbolm, B., Goldbarg, A. N., & Gullbring, B. (1972). Response to exercise after blood loss and
reinfusion. J Appl Physiol, 33(2), 175.
Esteve- Lanao, J., Foster, C., Seiler, S., & Lucia, A. (2007). Impact of training intensity distribution
on performance in endurance athletes. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research, 21(3),
943–950.
--- PAGE 538 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 539 ---
Esteve-Lanao, J., Rhea, M. R., Fleck, S. J., & Lucia, A.(2008). Running-specific, periodized
strength training attenuates loss of stride length during intense endurance running. Strength
Cond Res, 22(4), 1176-1183.
 
Esteve-Lanao, J., San Juan, A. F., Earnest, C. P., Foster, C., & Lucia, A. (2005). How do endurance
runners actually train? Relationship with competition performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc,
37(3), 496–504.
Faude, O., Kindermann, W., & Meyer, T. (2009). Lactate threshold concepts: How valid are they?
Sports Med, 39(6). 469–490.
Fiskerstrand A., & Seiler, K. S. (2004). Training and performance characteristics among Norwegian
international rowers 1970-2001. Scand J Med Sci Sports, 14, 303–310.
Fitts, R. H., & Widrick, J. J. (1996). Muscle mechanics: adaptations with exercise training. Exerc
Sport Sci Rev, 24, 427–473.
Fletcher, J. R., Esau, S. R., & Macintosh, B. R. (2009). Economy of running : beyond the
measurement of oxygen uptake. J Appl Physiol, Oct 15. [Epub ahead of print].
Franch, J., Madsen, K., Djuhuus, M. S., & Pedersen, P. K. (1998). Improved running economy
following intensified training correlates with reduced ventilatory demands. Med Sci Sports
Exerc, 30, 1250–1256.
Garcin, M., Mille-Hamard, L., & Billat, V. (2004). Influence of aerobic fitness level on measured and
estimated perceived exertion during exhausting runs. Int J Sports Med., 25(4), 270–277.
Garcin, M., Mille-Hamard, L., Devillers, S., Delattre, E., Dulfour, S. & Billat, V. (2003). Influence of
the type of training sport practiced on psychological and physiological parameters during
exhausting endurance exercises. Percept Mot Skills, 97(3-2), 1150–1162.
Gaskill, S. E., Serfass, R. C., Bacharach, D. W., & Kelly, J. M. (1999). Responses to training in cross-
country skiers. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 31, 1211–1217.
--- PAGE 540 ---
Gibala, M. J., Little, J. P., van Essen, M., Wilkin, G. P., Burgomaster, K. A., Safdar, A., Raha, S., &
Tarnopolsky, M. A. (2006). Short-term sprint interval versus traditional endurance training:
similar initial adaptations in human skeletal muscle and exercise performance. J Physiol,
575(3), 901–911.
Gilbert, K. L., Stokes, K. A., Hall, G. M., & Thompson, D. (2008). Growth hormone responses to 3
different exercise bouts in 18- to 25- and 40- to 50- year-old men. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab,
33(4), 706–712.
Girardo, O., Millet, G. P., Slawinski, J., Racinais, S. & Micallef, J. P. (2013). Changes in Running
Mechanics and Spring-Mass Behavior during a 5km Time Trial. Int J Sports Med. Apr 2.
Epub ahead of print.
Gledhill, N. (1982). Blood doping and related issues: a brief review. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., 14,
183–189.
Gledhill, N. (1985). The influence of altered blood volume and oxygen transport capacity on aerobic
performance. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev., 13, 75–93.
Gonzalez-Alonso, J., Teller, C., Andersen, S. L., Jensen, F. B., Hyldig, T., & Nielsen, B. (1999).
Influence of body temperature on the development of fatigue during prolonged exercise in
the heat. Journal of Applied Physiology, 86, 1032–1039.
Goodall, S., Gonzalez-Alonso, J., Ali, L., Ross, E. Z., & Romer, L. M. (2012). Supraspinal fatigue
after normoxic and hypoxic exercise in humans. J Physiol. 590(11), 2767-82.
Hagberg, J. M., Allen, W. K., Seals, D. R., Hurley, B.F., Ehsani, A.A., & Holloszy, J.O. (1985). A
hemodynamic comparison of young and older endurance athletes during exercise. Journal of
Applied Physiology, 58, 2041–2046.
Hansen, A. K., Fischer, C. P., Plomgaard, P., Andersen, J. L., Saltin, B., Pedersen, B. K. (2005).
Skeletal muscle adaptation: training twice every second day vs. Training once daily. J Appl
Physiol, 98(1), 93–99.
Hargreaves, M., & Spriett, L. (2006). Exercise Metabolism. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
--- PAGE 541 ---
Harms, C. A., Wetter, T. J., McClaran, S. R., Pegelow, S. R., Nickele, G. A., Nelson, W. B., Hanson,
P, & Dempsey, J. A. (1998). Effects of respiratory muscle work on cardiac output and its
distribution during maximal exercise. J Appl Physiol, 85, 609–18.
Harms, C. A.,Wetter, T. J., St Croix, C. M., Pegelow, D. F., & Dempsey, J. A. (2000). Effects of
respiratory muscle work on exercise performance. J Appl Physiol, 89(1), 131–8.
Hawkins, M. N., Raven, P. B., Snell, P. G., Stray-Gunderson, J., & Levine, B. L. (2007). Maximal
Oxygen Uptake as a Parametric Measure of Cardiorespiratory Capacity. Med Sci Sports
Exerc, 39(1), 103–107.
Henriksson, J., & Reitman, J. S. (1977) Time course of changes in human skeletal muscle succinate
dehydrogenase and cytochrome oxidase activities and maximal oxygen uptake with physical
activity and inactivity. Acta Physiol Scan, 99, 91–97.
Hickson, R. C., Dvorak, B. A., Gorostiaga, E. M., Kurowski, T. T., & Foster, C. (1988). Potential for
strength and endurance training to amplify endurance performance. J Appl Physiol, 65(5),
2285–2290.
Hickson, R., & Rosenkoetter, M. (1981). Reduced training frequencies and maintenance of increased
aerobic power Med Sci Sports Exer, 13(1), 13–16.
Hill, D. W. (1999). Energy system contributions in middle-distance running events. J Sports Sci.,
17(6), 477–483.
Hilty, L., Langer, N., Pascual-Marqui, R., Boutellier, U. & Lutz, K. (2011). Fatigue-induced increase
in intracortical communication between mid/anterior insular and motor cortex during cycling
exercise. Eur J Neurosci. 34(12), 2035-42.
Hilty, L., Jancke, L., Luechinger, R., Boutellier, U. & Lutz. (2011). Limitations of physical
performance in a muscle fatiguing handgrip exercise is mediated by thalamo-insular activity.
Human Brain Mapping. 32(12), 2151-60.
Hoffman, R. L. (1999). Effects of training at the ventilatory threshold on the ventilatory threshold
and performance in trained distance runners. J Strength Cond Res, 13, 118–123.
--- PAGE 542 ---
Holloszy, J. O. & Coyle, J. (1984). Adaptations of skeletal muscle to endurance exercise and their
metabolic consequences. J Appl Physiol, 56(4), 831–838.
Horoqitz, J. F., Sidossis, L. S., & Coyle, E. F. (1994). High efficiency of type I muscle fibers
improves performance. Int J Sports Med, 15(3), 152–157.
Hudson, B., & Fitzgerald, M. (2008). Running faster from the 5k to the marathon. New York:
Broadway Books.
Hurley, B. F., Hagberg, J. M., Allen, W. K., Seals, D. R., Young, J. C., Cuddihee, R. W., & Holloszy,
J. O. (1984). Effect of training on blood lactate levels during submaximal exercise. J Appl
Physiol., 56(5), 1260–1264.
Inbar, O., Weiner, P., Azgad, Y., Rotstein, A., & Weinstein, Y. (2000). Specific inspiratory muscle
training in well-trained endurance athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 32(7), 1233–1237.
Inham, S., Whyte, G., Pedlar, C., Bailey, D., Dunman, N., & Nevjill, A. (2008). Determinants of 800-
m and 1500m running performance using allometric models. Med. Sci. Sports Exere., 40(2),
345–350.
Issurin, V. (2008). Block periodization versus traditional training theory: a review. Journal of Sports
Medicine and Physical Fitness. 48, 65–75.
Iwasaki, K., Zhang, R., Zuckerman, J. H., & Levine, B. D. (2003). Dose-response relationship of the
cardiovascular adaptation to endurance training in healthy adults: how much training for
what benefit? J Appl Physiol, 95, 1575–1583.
Jacobs, I, Kaiser, P., & Tesch, P. (1981). Muscle strength and fatigue after selective glycogen
depletion in human skeletal muscle fibers. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol, 46(1), 47–53.
Jelkmann, W. (2004). Molecular biology of erythropoietin. Internal Medicine, 43, 649–659.
Jemma, J., Halwey, J., Kumar, D. K., Singh, V. P., & Cosic, I. (2005). Endurance training of trained
athletes- an electromyogram study. –
Jewell, U. R., Kvietikova, I., Scheid, A., Bauer, C., Wenger, R. H., Gassmann, M. (2001). Induction
of HIF-1 alpha is response to hypoxia is instantaneous. FASEB J, 15(7), 1312-1314.
--- PAGE 543 ---
Johnson, B. D., Babcock, M. A., Suman, O. E., & Dempsey, J. A. (1993). Exercise-induced
diaphragmatic fatigue in healthy humans. J Physiol, 460, 385–405.
Jung, A. P. (2003). The impact of resistance training on distance running performance. Sports Med,
33(7), 539–552.
Kainulainen, H. (2009). Run more, perform better—old truth revisited. J Appl Physiol, 106(5), 1477–
1478.
Ker, R. F., Bennett, M. B., Bibby, S. R., Kester, R. C., & Alexander, R. M. (1987). The spring in the
arch of the human foot. Nature, 325(7000), 147–149.
Klausen, K. L., Andersen, B., & Pelle, I. (1981). Adaptive changes in work capacity, skeletal muscle
capillarization, and enzyme levels during training and detraining. Acta Physiol. Scand. 113,
9–16.
Koltyn, K. F., Focht, B. C., Ancker, J. M., & Pasley, J. (1998). The effect of time of day and gender
on pain perception and selected psychobiological responses. Medicine and Science in Sports
and Exercise, 30(5), Supplement abstract 30.
Krib, B., Gledhill, N., Jamnik, V., & Warburton, D. (1997). Effect of alterations in blood volume on
cardiac function during maximal exercise. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 29(11), 1469–1476.
Kushmerick, M. J., & Davies, R. E. (1969) The chemical energetics of muscle contraction II. The
chemistry, efficiency, and power of maximally working sartorius muscle. Proc R Soc Lond
Ser B, 1174, 315–353.
Kyrolainen, H., Belli, A., & Komi, P. V. (2001). Biomechanical factors affecting running economy.
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., 33(8), 1330–1337.
Lacombe, V., Hinchcliff, K. W., Geor, R. J., & Lauderdale, M. A. (1999). Exercise that unduces
substantial muscle glycogen depletion impairs subsequent anaerobic capacity. Equine Vet J
Suppl, 30, 293–297.
LaManca, J. J., & Haymes, E. M. (1993). Effects of iron repletion on VO2max, endurance, and blood
lactate in women. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 25(12), 1386–1392.
--- PAGE 544 ---
Larsen, H. B. (2003). Kenyan dominance in distance running. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Mol.
Integr. Physiol. 136, 161–170.
Laursen, P. B. (2004). Training for intense exercise performance: high-intensity or high-volume
training? Scandinavian Journal of Sports Science and Medicine, (in review).
Laursen, P. B., & Jenkins, D. G. (2002). The scientific basis for high-intensity interval training:
optimising training programmes and maximising performance in highly trained endurance
athletes. Sports Med, 32(1), 53–71.
Laursen, P. B., Blanchard, M. A., & Jenkins, D. G. (2002a). Acute high-intensity interval training
improves Tvent and peak power output in highly trained males. Canadian Journal of Applied
Physiology, 27, 336–348.
Laursen, P. B., Shing, C. M., Peake, J. M., Coombes, J. S., & Jenkins, D. G. (2002b). Interval
training program optimization in highly trained endurance cyclists. Medicine and Science in
Sports and Exercise, 34, 1801–1807.
Legaz Arrese, A., Serrano Ostáriz, E., Jcasajús Mallén, J. A., & Munguía Izquierdo, D. (2005). The
changes in running performance and maximal oxygen uptake after long-term training in elite
athletes. J Sports Med Phys Fitness, 45(4), 435–40.
Leskinen, A., Hakkinen, K., Virmavirta, M. Isolehto, J., & Kyrolainen, H. (2009). Comparison of
running kinematics between elite and national-standard 1500m runners. Sports Biomech,
8(1), 1–9.
Levine, B. D., Lane, L.D., Buckey, J.C., Friedman, D.B., & Blomqvist, C.G. (1991). Left ventricular
pressure–volume and Frank–Starling relations in endurance athletes. Implications for
orthostatic tolerance and exercise performance. Circulation, 84, 1016–1023.
Lieberman, D. E., Venkadesan, M., Werbel, W. A., Daoud, A. I., D’Andrea, S., Davis, I. S.,
Mang’eni, R. O., & Pitsiladis, Y. (2010). Foot strike patterns and collision forces in
habitually barefoot versus shod runners. Nature, 463(7280), 531-535.
Lydiard, A. (1998). Running to the Top. Auckland, NZ: Meyer and Meyer Sport.
--- PAGE 545 ---
Mainwood, G. W. & Renaud, J. M. (1985). The effect of acid-base balance on fatigue of skeletal
muscle. Can J Physiol Pharmacol, 63, 403–416.
Manzi, V., Castagna, C., Padua, E., Lombardo, M., D’Ottavio, S., Massaro, M., Volterrani, M.,
Lellamo, F. (2009). Dose-response relationship of autonomic nervous system responses to
individualized training impulse in marathon runners. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol,
296(6), 1733–1740.
Marcora, S. M., Staiano, W., & Manning, V. (2009). Mental fatigue impairs physical performance in
humans. J Appl Physiol, 106, 857–864.
Marzo, F., Lavorgna, A., Coluzzi, G., Santucci, E., Tarantino, F., Rio, T., Conti, E., Autore, C., Agati,
L., & Andreotti, F. (2008). Erythropoietin in heart and vessels: focus on transcription and
signalling pathways. J Thromb Thrombolysis, 26, 183–187.
Mayhew, J. L. (1977).Oxygen cost and energy expenditure of running in trained runners. Br J Sports
Med, 11, 116–121.
Mauger, A. (2013). Fatigue is a pain- the use of novel neurophysiological techniques to understand
the fatigue-pain relationship. Front Physiol. 4: 104.
McConnel, A. K., & Sharpe, G. R. (2005). The effect of inspiratory muscle training upon maximum
lactate steady-state and blood lactate concentration. Eur J Appl Physiol, 94(3), 277–284.
McConell, G. K., Lee-Young, R. S., Chen, Z. P., Stepto, N. K., Huynh, N. N., Stephens, T. J., Canny,
B. J. & Kemp, B.E. (2005). Short-term exercise training in humans reduces AMPK signalling
during prolonged exercise independent of muscle glycogen. Journal of Physiology 568, 665–
676
Midgeley, A. W., McNaughton, L. R., & Jones, A. M. (2007). Training to enhance the physiological
determinants of long-distance running performance: can valid recommendations be given to
runners and coaches based on current scientific knowledge. Sports Med, 37(10), 857–880.
Midgeley, A. W., McNaughton, L. R., & Wilkinson, M. (2006). Is there an optimal training intensity
for enhancing maximal oxygen uptake of distance runners?: empirical research findings,
current opinions, physiological rationale and practical recommendations. Sports Med, 36(2),
117–132.
--- PAGE 546 ---
Mikkola, J., Rusko, H., Nummela, A., Pollari, T., & Hakkinen, K. (2007). Concurrent endurance and
explosive type strength training improves neuromuscular and anaerobic characteristics in
young distance runners. Int J Sports Med, 28, 602–611.
Millet, G. P., Jaouen, B., Borrani, F., & Candau, R. (2002). Effects of concurrent endurance and
strength training on running economy and VO(2) kinetics. Med Sci Sports Exerc., 34(8),
1351–1359.
Millet, G., Jaouen, B., Borrani, F. & Canau, R. (2002). Effects of concurrent endurance and strength
training on running economy and Vo2 kinetics. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 34, 1351–1359.
Molinsti, M. (2009). Plasticity properties of CPG circuits in humans: impact on gait recovery. Brain
Research Bulletin, 78(1), 22–25.
Modica, J.R. & Kram, R. (2005). Metabolic energy and muscular activity required for leg swing in
running. J Appl Physiol, 98, 2126-2131.
Monteiro, A. G., Aoki, M. S., Evangelista, A. L., Alveno, D. A., Monteiro, G. A., Picarro Ida, C., &
Ugrinowitsch, C. (2009). Nonlinear periodization maximizes strength gains in split resistance
training routines. Strength Cond Res, 23(4), 1321–1326.
Morgan, D. W., Bransford, D. R., Costill, D. L., Daniels, J. T., Howley, E. T., & Krahenbuhl, G. S.
(1995). Variation in the aerobic demand of running among trained and untrained subjects.
Med Sci Sports Exerc, 27, 404–409.
Morgan, D., Martin, P., Craib, M., Caruso, C., Clifton, R., & Hopewell, R. (1994). Effect of step
length optimization on the aerobic demand of running. J Appl Physiol, 77, 245–251.
Mostardi, R. A., & Campbell, T. A. (1981). Effects of training once vs. twice per day and
improvement in maximal aerobic power. Ohio J Sci, 81(5), 207–211.
Noakes, T. D. (2003). Commentary to accompany training and bioenergetic characteristics in elite
male and female Kenyan runners. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 35(2), 305–306.
Noakes, T. D. (2007). Determining the extent of neural activation during maximal effort: comment.
Med Sci Sports Exerc, 39(11), 2092.
--- PAGE 547 ---
Noakes, T. D. (2007). The central governor model of exercise regulation applied to the marathon.
Sports Med, 37(4-5), 374–377.
Noakes, T. D. (2008). How did A.V. Hill understand the VO2max and the “plateau phenomenon”?
Still no clarity? Br J Sports Med, 42(7), 574–580.
Noakes, T. D., & Marino, F. E. (2008). Does a central governor regulate maximal exercise during
combined arm and leg exercise? A rebuttal. Eur J Appl Physiol, 104(4), 757–759.
Noakes, T. D., & Marino, F. E. (2009). Point: counterpoint: maximal oxygen uptake is/is not limited
by a central nervous system governor. J Appl Physiol, 106, 338–339.
Okano, A. E., Fontes, E. B., Montenegro, R. A., et al. (2012). Brain stimulation modulates the
autonomic nervous system, ratings of perceived exertion and performance during maximal
exercise. J Sports Medicine
Ord. P & Gusbers, K. (2003). Pain thresholds and tolerances of competitive rowers and their use of
spontaneous self-generated pain coping strategies. Perceptual and Moter Skills. 97, 1219-
1222.
Paavolainen, L. M., Nummela, A. T., & Rusko, H. K. (1999b). Neuromuscular characteristics and
muscle power as determinants of 5-km running performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 31, 124–
130.
Paavolainen, L. M., Nummela, A. T., & Rusko, H. K. (2000). Muscle power factors and VO2max as
determinants of horizontal and uphill running performance. Scand J Sci Sports, 10, 286–291.
Paavolainen, L. M., Nummela, A. T., Rusko, H. K., & Hakkinen, K. (1999c). Neuromuscular
characteristics and fatigue during 10-km running. Int J Sports Med, 20,1–6.
Paavolainen, L., Hakkinen, K., Hamalainen, I., Nummela, A., & Rusko, H. (1999a). Explosive
strength-training improves 5-km running time by improving running economy and muscle
power. J Appl Physiol, 86, 1527–1533.
Pate, R. R., Macera, C. A., Bailey, S. P., Bartoli, W. P., & Powell, K. E. (1992). Physiological,
anthropometric, and training correlates of running economy. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 24, 1128–
1133.
--- PAGE 548 ---
Peltonen, J. E., Rusko, H. K., Rantamaki, J., Sweins, K., Nittymaki, S., & Viitasalo, J. T. (1997).
Effects of oxygen fraction in inspired air on force production and electromyogram activity
during ergometer rowing. European Journal of Applied Physiology, 76, 495– 503.
Peltonen, J. E., Leppavuori, A. P., Kyro, K. P., Makela, P., & Rusko, H. K. (1999). Arterial
hemoglobin oxygen saturation is affected by F(I)O2 at submaximal running velocities in elite
athletes. Scand J Med Sci Sports, 9(5), 265-271.
Pette, D. & Vrbova, G. (1999). What does chronic electrical stimulation teach us about muscle
plasticity? Muscle Nerve, 22, 666–677.
Peukker, H., Cojard, A., Putman, C. T., & Pette, D. (1999).Transient expression of myosin heavy
chain MHC1 alpha in rabbit muscle during fast to slow transition. J Muscle Res Cell Motil,
20(2), 147–154.
Power, S. K., Lawler, J., Dempsey, J. A., Dodd, S., & Landry, G. (1989). Effects of incomplete
pulmonary gas exchange on VO2max. J Appl Physiol, 66, 2491–2495.
Powers, S. K., Lawler, J., Dempsey, J. A., Dodd, S., & Landry, G. (1989). Effects of incomplete
pulmonary gas exchange of VO2max. Journal of Applied Physiology, 66, 2491–2495.
Purkiss, S. B. A., & Robertson, G. E. (2003). Methods for calculating internal mechanical work:
comparison using elite runners. Gait and Posture, 18, 143–149.
Quinn, T. J., Klooster, J. R., & Kenefick, R. W. (2002). Can intermittent exercise maintain or enhance
physiological benefits gained from previous traditional exercise? Medicine and Science in
Sports and Exercise, 34(5), Supplement abstract 510.
Rhea, M. R., Ball, S. D., Phillips, W. T., & Burkett, L. N. (2003). A comparison of linear and daily
undulating periodized programs with equated volume and intensity for strength. J Strength
Cond Res, 16(2), 250–255.
Ricci, J., & Léger, L. A. (1983). VO2max of cyclists from treadmill, bicycle ergometer and
velodrome tests. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol, 50(2), 283–289.
Romer, L. M., McConnel, A. K., & Jones, D. A. (2002). Inspiratory muscle fatigue in trained cyclists:
effects of inspiratory muscle training. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 34(5), 785–792.
Rowland, T. (2009). Endurance athletes’ stroke volume response to progressive exercise: A critical
review. Sports Med, 39(8), 687–695.
--- PAGE 549 ---
Rusko, H. (1992). Development of aerobic power in relation to age and training in cross-country
skiers. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 24, 1040–1047.
Rusko, H. K., Tikkanen, H. O., & Peltonen, J. E. (2004). Altitude and endurance training. Journal of
Sports Sciences, 22:10, 928 — 945.
Saltin, B. (1973). Oxygen transport by the circulatory system during exercise in man. In Limiting
Factors of Physical Performance, edited by J. Keul. 235-251. Stuttgart: Georg Thueme
Verlag.
Saunders, P. U., Pyne, D. B., Telford, R. D., & Hawley, J. A. (2004). Factors affecting running
economy in trained distance runners. Sports Medicine, 34(7), 465–485.
Saunders, P. U., Telford, R. D., Pyne, D. B., Peltola, E. M., Cunninhgam, R. B., Gore, C. J., &
Hawley, J. A. (2006). Short-term plyometric training improves running economy in highly
trained middle and long distance runners. J Strength Cond Res., 20(4), 947–954.
Schlader, Z.J., Simmons, S.E., Stannard,S.R., & Mundel,T. (2011). The independent roles of
temperature and thermal perception in the control of human thermoregulatory behavior.
Physiol.Behav. 103, 217–224.
Scholz, M. N., Bobbert, M. F., van Soest, A. J., Clark, J. R., & van Heerden, J. (2008). Running
biomechanics: shorter heels, better economy. Journal of Experimental Biology, 211, 3266–
3271.
Seiler, S., & Tønnessen, E. (2009). Intervals, thresholds, and long slow distance: the role of intensity
and duration in endurance training. Sportscience, 13, 32–53.
Selye, H. (1978). The Stress of Life. McGraw-Hill.
Sheel, W. A. (2002). Respiratory training in healthy individuals: physiological rationale and
implications for exercise performance. Sports Medicine. 32(9), 567–581.
Shephard, R. J. (2009). Is the measurement of maximal oxygen intake passé? (2008). Br J Sports
Med, 43, 83–85.
Simmons, S., & Freeman, W. A. (2006). Take the Lead: A Revolutionary approach to Cross Country.
Simmons & Freeman.
--- PAGE 550 ---
Sinnett, A. M., Berg, K., Latin, R. W., & Noble, J. M. (2001). The relationship between field tests of
anaerobic power and 10-km run performance. J Strength Cond Resm 15(4), 405–412.
Smith, T. P., Coombes, J. S., & Geraghty, D. P. (2003). Optimising high-intensity treadmill training
using the running speed at maximal O(2) uptake and the time for which this can be
maintained. Eur J Appl Physiol, 89(3-4), 337–343.
Smith, T. P., McNaughton, L. R., & Marshall, K. J. (1999). Effects of 4-wk training using
Vmax/Tmax on VO2max and performance in athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 31, 892–896.
Soungatoulin, V., Beam, W., Kersey, R., & Peterson, J. (2003). Comparative effects of traditional
versus periodized intensity training on cycling performance. Medicine and Science in Sports
and Exercise, 35(5), Supplement abstract 185.
Spenser, M., & Gaston, P. (2001). Energy system contribution during 200- to 1500-m running in
highly trained athletes. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., 33(1), 157–162.
Spurrs, R. W., Murphy, A. J., & Watsford, M. L. (2003). The effect of plyometric training on distance
running performance. Eur J Appl Physiol. 89(1). 1–7.
--- PAGE 551 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 552 ---
Stallknecht, B., Vissing, J., & Galbo, H. (1998). Lactate production and clearance in exercise.
Effects of training. A mini-review. Scand J Med Sci Sports, 8(3), 127–131.
Stephenson, D. G., Lamb, G. D., & Stephenson, G. M. (1998). Events of the excitation-contraction-
relaxation (E-C-R) cycle in fast- and slow-twitch mammalian muscle fibres relevant to
muscle fatigue. Acta Physiol Scan, 162(3). 229–245.
Stone, M. R., Thomas, K., Wilkinson, M., et al. (2012). Effects of Deception on Exercise
Performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 44(3), 534-541.
Stepto, N. K., Hawley, J.A., Dennis, S. C., & Hopkins, W. G. (1999). Effects of different interval-
training programs on cycling time-trial performance. Medicine and Science in Sports and
Exercise, 31, 736–741.
Stockman, C. & Fandrey, J. (2006). Hypoxia induced erythropoietin production: a paradigm for
oxygen-regulated gene expression. Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and
Physiology, 3, 968–979.
Svedenhag, J., & Sjodin, B. (1994). Body-mass-modified running economy and step length in elite
male middle and long-distance runners. Int J Sports Med, 15(6), 305–310.
Tanser, T. (2008). More fire: How to run the Kenyan way. Yardley, PA: Westholme Publishing.
Teunissen, L., Grabowski, A., & Kram, R. (2007). Effects of independently altering body weight and
body mass on the metabolic cost of running. The Journal of Experimental Biology, 210,
4418-4427.
Tesarz, J., Schuster, A. K., Hartmann, M., Gerhardt, A., & Eich, W. (2012). Pain perception in
athletes compared to normally active controls. Pain, 154(6), 1253-1262.
Tesarz, J., Gerhardt, A., Schommer, K., Treede, R., & Eich, W. (2013). Alterations in endogenous
pain modulation in endurance athletes: Pain, 154(7), 1022-1262
Thomson, J. A., Green, H. J., & Houston, M. E. (1979). Muscle glycogen depletion patterns in fast
twitch fibre subgroups of man during submaximal and supramaximal exercise. Flugers Arch,
--- PAGE 553 ---
379(1), 105–108.
Tucker, R., Kayser, B., Rae, E., Raunch, L., Bosch, A. & Noakes, T. (2007). Hyperoxia improves 20
km cycling time trial performance by increasing muscle activation levels while perceived
exertion stays the same. Eur J Appl Physiol, 101(6), 771–781.
Tucker, R., Rauch, L., Harley, Y. X. R., & Noakes, T. D. (2004). Impaired exercise performance
in the heat is associated with an anticipatory reduction in skeletal muscle recruitment.
Eur J Physiol, 448, 422–430.
Ugrinowitsch, Carlos. (2013). Cerebral And Muscular Oxygenation During Different Modes Of
Exercise. ACSM conference 2013
Vickers, R. R. (2005). Running economy: comparing alternative measurement tools. Naval
Health Research Center. Report 05-14.
Volianitis, S., McConnel, A. K., Koutedakis, Y., McNaughton, L., Backx, K., & Jones, D. A. (2001).
Inspiratory muscle training improves rowing performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 33(5), 803–
809.
Vollaard, N. B. J., Constantin-Teodosiu, D., Fredriksson, K, Rooyackers, O., Jansson, E., Greenhaff,
P. L., Timmons, J. A., & Sundberg, C. J. (2009). Systematic analysis of adaptations in aerobic
capacity and submaximal energy metabolism provides a unique insight into determinants of
human aerobic performance. J Appl Physiol, 106, 1479–1486.
Wagner, P. D. (1995). Limitations of oxygen transport to the cell. Intensive Care Med, 21(5), 391–
398.
Warddrip, E. M. & Kram, R. (2012). Disintegrating the metabolic cost of human running: weight
support, forward propulsion, and leg swing. American Society of Biomechanics Conference.
Weston, A. R., Myburgh, K. H., Lindsay, F. H., Dennis, S. C, Noakes, T. D., & Hawley, J. A. (1996).
Skeletal muscle buffering capacity and endurance performance after high-intensity training
by well-trained cyclists. Eur J Appl Physiol, 75, 7–13.
Weyand, P. G., Sandell, R. F., Prime, D. N. & Bundle, M. W. (2010). The biological limits to running
speed are imposed from the ground up. J Appl Physiol, 108, 950–961.
--- PAGE 554 ---
Williams, J. S., Wongsathikun, J., Boon, S. M., & Acevedo, E. O. (2002). Inspiratory muscle training
fails to improve endurance capacity in athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 34(7), 1194–1198.
Williams, K. R., & Cavanagh, P. R. (1987). Relationship between distance running mechanics,
running economy, and performance. J Appl Physiol, 63(3), 1236–1245.
Wilmore, J. H., Stanforth, P. R., Gagnon, J., Rice, T., Mandel, S., Leon, A. S., Rao, D. C., Skinner, J.
S., & Bouchard, C. (2001). Cardiac output and stroke volume changes with endurance
training: the HERITAGE Family Study. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 33(1), 99–106.
Wilt, F. (1964). Run, Run, Run. Track and Field News.
Wright, S., & Weyand, P. G. (2001). The application of ground force explains the energetic cost of
running backward and forward. J Expl Biol., 204(10), 1805–1815.
Yamamoto, L. M., Lopez, R. M., Klau, J. F., Casa, D. J., Kraemer, W. J., & Maresh, C. M. (2008).
The effects of resistance training on endurance distance running performance among highly
trained runners: a systematic review. J Strength Cond Res, 22(6), 2036–2044.
Yeo, W. K., Paton, C. D., Garnham, A. P., Burke, L. M., Carey, A. L., & Hawley, J. A. (2008).
Skeletal muscle adaptation and performance responses to once a day versus twice every
second day endurance training regimens. –
Yoshida, T., Udo, M., Chida, M., Ichioka, M., Makiguchi, K., & Yamaguchi, T. (1990). Specificity of
physiological adaptation to endurance training in distance runners and competitive walkers.
Eur J Appl Physiol, 61, 197–201.
Zoll, J., Ponsot, E., Dufour, S., Doutreleau, S., Ventura-Clapier, R., Vogt, M., Hoppeler, H., Richard,
R., & Fluck, M. (2006). Exercise training in normobaric hypoxia in endurance runners. III.
Appl Physiol, 100, 1258–1266
--- PAGE 557 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 558 ---
About the Author
Steve Magness is a runner, coach, exercise
scientist, and most recently a writer. He has been
a serious runner since the age of 14 and has had
numerous running accomplishments ranging from
holding the Texas High School mile record
(4:01.02) to qualifying for NCAA nationals as an
individual in Cross Country.
Steve is currently the Cross Country coach
at the University of Houston. In only one year as
the coach at UH, he has guided 3 athletes to
qualifying for the 1st round of the NCAA
championships in the 800m, and has had athletes
set a school record in the 3,000m and top 5 all
time times in the 800, 1,500, mile, 3,000, and 3,000m steeplechase. In
addition to collegiate coaching, Magness coaches professionals Jackie
Areson who was 15th at the 2013 World Championships in Russia, Asics
steeplechaser Sara Hall, and 4 time USATF championship qualifier in the
1,500m Tommy Schmitz. Magness has also acted as a consultant for
training, science, medical, and nutrition advice to numerous other world
class runners and triathletes and as a consultant for the development of
coaches’ education for several countries.
He has also coached on the high school level where he had
numerous regional and state qualifying teams and individuals. His most
recent team was nationally ranked and finished 2nd at the Texas state meet.
Additionally, an individual from that team was 12th at nationals in Cross
Country and the TX state champion in the 3200m.
Steve is a 2007 suma cum laude graduate from the University of
Houston with a B.S. in Exercise Science and a 2010 graduate of George
Mason University with a M.S. in EFHP-Exercise. While writing is a more
recent undertaking, he has written articles for IAAF’s New Studies in
Athletics, Running Times, Competitor magazine, Men’s Health, and
Runner’s World. Additionally, he maintains the popular running website
www.ScienceofRunning.com.
--- PAGE 559 ---
 
For more articles on training distance runners and the science behind
endurance visit:
www.ScienceofRunning.com
 
--- PAGE 560 ---
OceanofPDF.com