
--- PAGE 4 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 5 ---
How to Run the Perfect Race
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 6 ---
How to Run the Perfect Race
Better Racing Through Better Pacing
Matt Fitzgerald
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 7 ---
For my friend Bertrand,
a true pacing master in the marathon of life
Copyright © 2024 by Matt Fitzgerald
First published as On Pace: Discover How to Run Every Race at Your Real Limit (2022), fully
updated and revised.
All rights reserved. Printed in the USA.
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or
by any means, electronic or photocopy or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
publisher except in the case of brief quotations within critical articles and reviews.
80/20 Publishing, LLC
1073 Overland Drive
Midway, UT 84049
www.8020books.com
Distributed in the United States and Canada by Simon & Schuster
Library of Congress Control Number: 2024933842
ISBN 979-8-9892569-4-5 print
ISBN 979-8-9892569-5-2 ebook
Cover and interior design by Vicki Hopewell
Cover photo: Johnny Zhang
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 8 ---
Contents
Introduction: Another Way to Be Good at Running
Part I: How to Master Pacing
1 Anatomy of a Perfect Race
2 The Science of Pacing
3 Why You Suck at Pacing
4 Pacing as Self-Regulation
5 The Mind of a Pacing Master
6 Pacing in Training
7 Pacing in Competition
8 Macropacing
Part II: Training Plans
9 5K Training Plans
10 10K Training Plans
11 Half-Marathon Training Plans
12 Marathon Training Plans
References
About the Author
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 9 ---
“It is a misconception to think that during evolution
humans sacrificed physical skill in exchange for intelligence:
wielding one’s body is a mental activity.”
—Ted Chiang, “Understand”
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 10 ---
Introduction
Another Way to Be Good at Running
My first endurance race was an 8K road run in Dover, New Hampshire,
which I completed at age 12 in 1983. My last race (officially) was the 2020
Atlanta Marathon, which I completed while unknowingly infected with
COVID-19, the pesky virus that ultimately ended my athletic career.
Between these competitive bookends, I contested scores of other road races,
track and cross country races, trail ultramarathons, duathlons, and
triathlons.
Like any endurance athlete, I had good races and bad races. The good
ones included the 2002 Super Run 5K, the 2007 Davis Stampede 10K, the
2009 Palm Springs Half Marathon, and the 2017 Chicago Marathon, where
I recorded my fastest times at each of these distances. Then there were the
races I won: the 2009 Fiesta Island 10K, the 2016 Lake Chabot Trail 50K,
and the 2017 Jailbreak Marathon, among others. But my best race of all was
one that I neither won nor ran particularly fast in, and it wasn’t even really a
race.
While COVID-19 ended my athletic career, it didn’t happen right away.
For 6 months, I was in the pink, rid of the acute infection and not yet
crippled by long COVID, a chronic version of the virus that still afflicts me
today. And it was during this last season of health that I ran the race I’m
most proud of, albeit unofficially.
The Atlanta Marathon itself was one of my best races. I finished first in
my age group and 14th overall with a time of 2:46:59 on a course with more
than 1,800 feet of elevation gain. At 48, I was about as fit as I’d ever been,
but much of that fitness vanished during the month I spent on my back,
coughing up phlegm, bile, and blood. When at last my body gave me the
green light to resume exercise, I felt powerfully motivated to reclaim the
high perch of supreme conditioning I’d roosted on in Atlanta. While
everyone else was complaining about mass event cancellations, I burned to
train hard and compete in whatever way I could.
--- PAGE 11 ---
I completed my first tentative post-COVID test run on April 8. The
Rambling Runner Virtual Marathon, organized by my friend Matt Chittim,
was scheduled to take place 40 days later, on June 17. I signed up. When I
tweeted my plan to go from sickbed to start line in less than 6 weeks, a troll
replied with the sniping comment, “What could possibly go wrong?” But I
had no intention of putting myself through the proverbial meat grinder.
Although my goal was undeniably rash, I would play it smart, calling upon
my decades of experience to see how fit I could get in such a brief span of
time and how well I could perform at an unforgiving race distance despite a
severely compressed training buildup.
In concession to both my age and my long history of injury, I designed a
program that featured every-other-day running. Each run would count,
however, with high-intensity workouts and long endurance runs alternating
throughout the build, supplemented by loads of nonimpact crosstraining. I
knew going in that there would be days when my body would veto the plan,
and when it did, I listened. For example, a 20-miler turned into a 12-miler
when it became clear that forcing my way through the remaining distance
would have put me in a deep hole. Overall, though, my training went well,
culminating in a confidence-boosting 14-mile steady-state run that left me
believing a sub-3-hour marathon might be possible.
The nice thing about virtual races is that you get to choose your own
route. I chose a 2-mile loop that started right outside my front door, with a
makeshift fluid station set up at the foot of my driveway. Never before had I
started a marathon with less certainty about what would happen. In previous
cycles, I’d built upon a solid base of fitness with 12 to 16 weeks of focused
training that rendered me 100 percent prepared to do my best while also
supplying me with a very precise sense of what I could do on race day. At
the Chicago Marathon, for example, I started out with the goal of running
6:05 per mile straight through, having deduced from key workouts that this
pace represented my current limit. How accurate was my assessment? Well,
I finished in 2:39:30, which works out to an average pace of 6:05.005 per
mile.
Comparatively, the Rambling Runner Virtual Marathon was an exercise
in flying blind. Scarcely more than a month earlier, I had struggled to jog 6
miles at 10 minutes per mile, and although I had made rapid progress since
then, my goal of breaking 3 hours felt far more like a guess or a hope than a
--- PAGE 12 ---
prediction. But that was part of the fun. To achieve the best possible result, I
would have to lean on the deep internal knowledge I’d accrued from four
dozen prior marathons and feel my way to my present limit.
The other nice thing about virtual races is that you get to choose when
you start. But with a high temperature of 90°F forecasted in Oakdale,
California, I elected to set out at a standard marathon gun time of 7:00 a.m.
I was skirting the fenced perimeter of the neighborhood dog park, alive with
frolicking canines observed by clustered humans, when my watch chirped.
A quick wrist glance revealed a split time of 6:44 for the first mile, 5
seconds ahead of target. To the uninitiated, 5 seconds sounds like a
rounding error, but the experienced runner knows that if their target pace
represents their true limit, running just a few ticks faster will result in a
head-on collision with the wall somewhere down the road.
Yet my pace felt right in a way I can’t explain. I somehow knew I could
keep it up, and there would be no wall, unlike my debut marathon 21 years
before, when I’d thought I knew I could sustain the faster-than-planned
pace I’d started at in a fit of youthful exuberance, only to find myself
walking at 19 miles. But I was no longer that runner, and although I
couldn’t predict exactly how the next 25 miles would unfold, I’d have bet
my life savings that I wouldn’t walk.
And I didn’t. To the contrary, I sped up, completing the marathon in
2:54:52, which equates to 6:39 per mile. I put everything I had into the last
2 miles and eked out my quickest splits, but not by much (6:29, 6:31). The
goal of every racer is to finish knowing they couldn’t have gone any faster,
and I did that in the Rambling Runner Virtual Marathon. It wasn’t my
fastest race, and I didn’t win, but it’s the closest thing to a perfect race I’ve
ever run.
The Great Equalizer
It is often said that races aren’t run on paper. The expression is used to
make the point that great preparation does not guarantee a great
performance. To fulfill the potential they bring to a race, runners must
execute it perfectly, which isn’t easy. An honest runner can almost always
look back at a completed race and identify errors or lapses that, if avoided,
could have saved them a few seconds at least.
--- PAGE 13 ---
Perfection is difficult to attain in all sports, of course. You will never hear
the winner of the Wimbledon tennis tournament or the Masters golf
tournament claim that they played perfectly. What’s different about running,
though, is its relative simplicity. In tennis, golf, and other sports, execution
has a number of important elements. In running, however, execution is
about pacing first and foremost. After all, a race is nothing more than an
attempt to get from point A to point B in the least time possible, and the
primary determinant of success in this effort is pacing, or how fast you
choose to run at each moment throughout the race. There’s no better feeling
in our sport than running the perfect race, but it is reserved for those who
fully master the skill of pacing.
In light of this fact, you would think that pacing skill development would
be a major point of emphasis for most runners, but it’s not. The typical
runner recognizes that pacing matters and knows they need to get better at it
yet does little more to improve than vaguely try to do better each time they
compete. Mastering the skill requires a more intentional, structured, and
sustained approach, as I learned over the course of my journey from youth
runner to veteran coach.
How I Discovered the Power of Pacing
My earliest memory of running longer than the typical playground distance
dates back to 1978, when I was 7 years old and living with my family in the
deep woods of Hillsboro, New Hampshire. My dad, who at that time ran for
fitness (he would later become a marathoner), owned a cool little gadget
that he would hook to the waistband of his shorts and use to measure
distance when he “jogged” (his word). This pedometer, as it was called,
looked like a cross between a compass and a pocket watch and made a
satisfying clicking sound with each stride. I had no particular interest in
jogging at that age, but I was very interested in Dad’s pedometer, so I took
it for a spin one day, clicking off a full mile (assuming the thing was
accurate).
By the age of 12, under my father’s continued influence, I was running
regularly, using a cheap children’s sports watch to measure time and using
various landmarks—mapped out with the aid of the family Renault’s
odometer—for distance. Numbers weren’t the be-all and end-all of the
--- PAGE 14 ---
running experience for me, but I liked how they gave purpose to it. A soccer
player as well, I saw times and distances as being roughly equivalent to the
tally of goals and assists I kept as a striker for the Bobcats of Oyster River
Middle School.
In high school, having been forced to quit soccer after I suffered a
catastrophic knee injury during a game, I ran cross country and track. Our
team’s bread-and-butter track workout during the outdoor season was 12 ×
400 meters at a roughly 1-mile race pace. My teammates and I made a game
of it, each runner taking his turn leading a lap, at the completion of which
the others tried to guess the time. We got so good at the game that the
winning guess was seldom more than a few tenths off in either direction.
More than a decade later, at 28, I ran my first half-marathon in dragstrip-
flat Phoenix. In addition to the usual awards for overall and age-group
placement, a prize was given by the race organizer to the runner who came
closest to correctly predicting their finish time. I reckoned I was fit enough
to average 6:00 per mile, which would yield a finish time of 1:18:39. To
take a bit of pressure off myself, I rounded up to 1:19:00, which was
unfortunate because my actual time of 1:18:46 would have earned me a gift
certificate from a local running specialty shop.
This happened in 1999. By 2001, I was coaching other runners. Like a lot
of new coaches, I took my own depth of experience for granted initially.
Forgetting I hadn’t always known how to pace my running correctly, I was
surprised by the kinds of mistakes my clients made. The biggest training
error I saw was getting stuck in what I call the moderate-intensity rut—
doing way too much training in the no-man’s-land between easy and hard.
I’ve since become known for advocating an “80/20” training method, where
80 percent of training is consciously performed at low intensity and the rest
at moderate to high intensity.
I also saw plenty of bad race pacing. An example is Chris, whose
personal-best marathon time prior to hiring me was 3:13. When his next
marathon rolled around, Chris was in 3:05 shape by my estimation, but he
ended up running 3:08 after having completed the first 20 miles at a 3:02
pace and then blowing up. As a general matter, I am happy with an athlete’s
race performance whenever the athlete themselves is happy, but in this case,
I must admit I was a little unhappy when, after throwing away roughly 3.2
--- PAGE 15 ---
percent of his fitness, Chris texted me to say he felt good about losing “only
a few minutes” in the last few miles.
“A few minutes!” I wanted to reply (but didn’t). “Is that your idea of
good pacing?” It wasn’t just that Chris had executed poorly. He’d also
failed to value pacing properly, shrugging off the loss of “a few minutes”
like a billionaire dismissing a few lost dollars. Imagine a boxer being
complacent about a few extra punches to the head that could have been
prevented with more vigilant defenses or a golfer waving away a few
quadruple bogeys that might have been avoided with more careful club
selection!
Compete at Your Full Potential
Pacing is everything in competitive distance running. I mean it: everything.
It is the sport’s defining characteristic—the singular quiddity that makes
distance running different from all other sports and exercise activities,
including other forms of running. Take sprinting. The word sprint is used
rather loosely in colloquial speech, but the true definition of a sprint is a
race that is performed at maximal effort from start to finish—which is to
say, without pacing. By this standard, there is no such thing as a sprint that
lasts longer than 45 seconds, give or take, because it’s impossible to
minimize completion time in a race lasting longer than about 45 seconds
without deliberately holding back a bit at the start. It is pacing that
distinguishes a distance event from a sprint. At the other extreme is jogging,
or running for exercise, as my dad used to do in his pedometer days.
Jogging is also a form of running, but we don’t lump it together with the
sport of distance running any more than we do sprinting. The difference
again is pacing. In this case, whereas the noncompetitive jogger is just
trying to fill a certain amount of time with healthy exertion, the competitive
distance runner is trying to cover a fixed distance in the least time possible,
an objective that demands skillful pacing.
Naturally, some competitive runners are more serious than others, but
every runner should take pacing seriously and seek to master the skill. It’s a
very different sort of commitment than spending thousands of dollars on
gear or working out twice a day every day. You don’t have to carve out
extra time or accept a higher risk of injury to get serious about becoming a
--- PAGE 16 ---
pacing master. Like a boxer staying vigilant in their defenses or a golfer
taking pains to always select the right club for the next shot, a runner should
make every reasonable effort to ensure bad pacing doesn’t needlessly limit
their improvement. Do you really want to run slower race times than you
could just because you can’t be bothered to master your sport’s most
fundamental skill? I didn’t think so!
For me, though, pacing’s importance goes even deeper. I see it as a
democratizing element of our sport. There’s nothing you can do about your
talent. Whatever genes you were born with, those are the genes you have to
work with. But pacing skill is a completely different matter that depends on
body awareness, judgment, and toughness—qualities that aren’t affected
one way or another by innate ability. Sure, the Olympians happen to have
all of these things, including raw talent, in abundance, but there are plenty
of runners with far less talent who possess just as much of the other three
qualities. Indeed, there’s no reason the slowest runner in a given race can’t
be the best pacer. Nor is there any reason you can’t find the absolute limit of
your potential by mastering the skill of pacing.
Every runner stops getting faster at some point. But pacing is something
that any runner can get better at indefinitely. I know I did. Though my
VO2max peaked in my early thirties, my race execution was still rising
when I took my final bow as a competitive athlete. No matter how well you
executed your last race, there’s always a chance you can do even better the
next time. So if you’re the kind of runner who likes to improve, know that
pacing is the one part of running you can improve in for as long as you
choose to run.
What We’re Up Against
The vast majority of the runners I’ve coached weren’t very good at pacing
when I started working with them. And it’s not as if poor pacers seek me
out. Research shows that most runners pace far from perfectly in races.
Why? I’ll provide a fuller answer to this question in Chapter 3, but here are
the three main reasons:
1. Pacing is hard! Nobody is great at it initially.
--- PAGE 17 ---
2. Experience is the best teacher of pacing skill, and most runners
lack the depth of experience that enables masterful pacing.
3. Runners are exceedingly dependent on their devices, and this
dependency undercuts the pillars of pacing ability, hindering the
development of body awareness, impeding the application of
good judgment, and preventing many runners from fully
accessing their toughness.
The last of these reasons is the one that really bugs me, in part because it
is literally manufactured and hence unnecessary, in part because it’s getting
worse all the time and in part because I feel somewhat responsible. I’ve
mentioned that I advocate an 80/20 training method as a corrective for the
common problem of doing too much training at moderate intensity—which
is in essence a pacing error. The method laid out in the books 80/20
Running and 80/20 Triathlon and on the 80/20 Endurance web site has
helped tens of thousands of athletes all over the world break free of the
moderate-intensity rut. Devices such as heart rate monitors and power
meters are helpful in this process because they allow athletes to objectively
monitor their exercise intensity, making it easier for those who aren’t as
adept at reading their effort by feel to balance their training intensities
appropriately. The problem is that these same athletes risk becoming even
more device dependent and less capable of regulating their effort by feel.
This wouldn’t be a big deal, I suppose, if the devices were as good at
making pacing decisions as a human with mastery of this skill, but they
aren’t, nor will they ever be.
Run with Confidence
As a coach, I place a heavy emphasis on pacing skill development. In the
beginning, admittedly, my method consisted of little more than chastising
athletes when they blew their pacing in a workout and patting them on the
back when they executed correctly. In other words, the Coach Matt Pacing
Skill Development Program, if you can call it that, amounted to little more
than exercising the same vague intention to do better next time that many
runners get absolutely nowhere with. In my defense, though, I had come of
age at a time when pacing wasn’t really talked about much because lack of
pacing skill wasn’t a widespread problem. When the topic did come up with
--- PAGE 18 ---
coaches, their stock advice was to relax and let experience take care of it.
But with today’s device dependency, experience isn’t quite the teacher it
once was. Recognizing this, I began to put more thought into devising ways
to counteract the negative effects of device usage on pacing skill
development.
My modus operandi in all of my efforts to elevate my coaching game is
to steal from the best. Heck, even the 80/20 method that I’ve gotten so
much mileage out of was stolen from its discoverer, exercise physiologist
Stephen Seiler (who very graciously wrote the foreword to 80/20
Triathlon). Hence my quest to become a better pacing teacher has largely
taken the form of an ongoing effort to collect information about the things
true pacing masters do that other runners don’t and to formulate these
observations into techniques and practices that my athletes can implement
in workouts and races. I’ve also delved deeply into the science of pacing,
mining it for other tools with potential usefulness in the development of
pacing skill. Over time, this grab bag of methods has evolved into a
comprehensive approach to mastering pacing.
If I were a more profit-seeking and less honest person, I would tell you
that this approach works perfectly in every case—that it transforms even the
most inept pacer into an Olympic-grade master in a matter of weeks. The
truth is, it doesn’t. Like every other skill, pacing ability is not distributed
equally across the population. Individual athletes improve by different
amounts with the same approach. But what I can say is that everyone I work
with on pacing does improve, and by a greater amount, I believe, than they
would by continuing to muddle along by their bootstraps. And some do in
fact achieve full mastery.
What’s more, runners of all types enjoy the process. Analytical types who
love data enjoy the pursuit of pacing mastery because through it they learn
how to use device data more judiciously and also how to use their own
perceptions as an additional source of reliable data. Intuitive types who are
daunted by technology enjoy the process because it puts them in control of
their devices, which become facilitators of, rather than rivals to, their
preferred run-by-feel approach. Even those whose progress comes slowly
find that the intentional pacing practice I guide them through makes their
running more engaging and rewarding. Indeed, from my perspective as a
coach, the most satisfying part of the process isn’t seeing athletes get better
--- PAGE 19 ---
at pacing but watching them start to trust themselves more. Coaching
legend Vern Gambetta once tweeted, “The goal in coaching is to develop
self-sufficient, adaptable athletes prepared to thrive in the competitive
cauldron. Give your athletes the mental and physical skills. Get them to the
point where they trust in their preparation and let them go.” I couldn’t agree
more, and in today’s environment, I’ve come to see the teaching of pacing
skill as critical to achieving this larger goal.
The key concepts at play here are self-trust and self-sufficiency. There is
no better feeling in the sport of running than that of knowing what you can
do and then going out and doing it. That is the feeling I experienced in my
postcoronavirus solo marathon, and that is what I want for you. There’s
always an element of uncertainty in racing, even when you give yourself
more than 40 days to go from coughing up bile to attempting a marathon.
Some of this uncertainty comes from factors that are beyond our control,
like the weather. The rest comes from inside us—doubts about our ability to
execute a smart, gutsy performance. When you’ve mastered the skill of
pacing, all of these doubts go away. You still don’t know exactly what will
happen (what fun would it be if you did?), but you have total confidence
that you will not let yourself down. Close your eyes for a moment and
imagine what that’s like. Now stop imagining and make it happen!
A writer at heart, I couldn’t possibly remain content with sharing what
I’ve learned about pacing skill development with only the handful of
athletes I coach one-on-one. Inevitably, I got the itch to compose a book on
the subject, and here it is. My hope and expectation is that How to Run the
Perfect Race will do the same thing for you that my hands-on pacing
guidance has done for the individual athletes I coach. I’ll start out by
defining perfect race execution, which is the ultimate goal of pacing. I will
then deliver a concise lesson on the science of pacing, which is far more
interesting than you might assume but also serves the practical purpose of
equipping you with a better understanding of what it means to master the
skill. This will be followed by a fuller explanation of the specific obstacles
you’ll need to overcome to get where you want to go and the most effective
ways to overcome them. Next, we’ll explore what it looks like to reach the
other side of these obstacles—to become a pacing master. The second half
of the book gets down to brass tacks, offering specific strategies, exercises,
and plans you can use to programmatically improve your pacing in races,
workouts, and the training process as a whole.
--- PAGE 20 ---
What this book will not do is solve the pacing problem for you. There is
no silver bullet where pacing is concerned. Remember, the desire to have
someone or something else do the hard work of pacing for you is what got
you into this mess in the first place! You simply cannot become a pacing
master without taking responsibility for it. Good coaching can help, and
technology has a valid role to play as well, but in the end, it’s on you to
execute.
There are two ways to look at this responsibility. From one perspective,
it’s an intimidating burden, but from another, it’s an opportunity. The very
fact that skillful pacing is hard and that most runners suck at it and wish
someone or something else would handle it for them creates an opening for
you to become better at it than most of your fellow runners. While others
remain resigned to mediocre or poor pacing or vainly hope that they’ll get
better at it without making any systematic effort to do so, you can leave
them behind (literally) by embracing the process I’m about to teach you. I
can’t make any promises about how far you will get toward perfection as a
competitor, but I can promise that you won’t regret the journey.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 21 ---
1
Anatomy of a Perfect Race
The men’s elite competition at the 2019 Berlin Marathon was not set up as a
formal world-record attempt. In prior years, it had been, and with good
success. Eight of the previous 10 men’s marathon world records had been
recorded in Berlin, including the existing record of 2:01:39 set by Eliud
Kipchoge the year before. The marquee entrant in 2019 was Kenenisa
Bekele, widely considered the greatest distance runner God ever created but
who, at 37, was getting a bit long in the tooth and was 3 years past his last
major victory. Hired pacers had been asked to take the race out at 2:55 per
kilometer (about 4:41 per mile), which would yield a fast but not
historically fast marathon time, close to Bekele’s personal best (PB) of
2:03:03 if sustained for the full 42.2 kilometers. The prevailing opinion in
online fan forums was that Bekele himself would not only fail to sustain it
but fail to finish, as he’d done in two of his last four marathons.
On the eve of the event, the soft-spoken Ethiopian told the assembled
media, “Overall I have prepared well, although my training period of three
months is perhaps rather short for a marathon. This was because of an
earlier injury. But I am ready for Sunday and want to show what I can do.”
Having followed Bekele’s career closely from the time he burst onto the
international running scene with an astonishing 33-second win at the 2001
IAAF Junior World Cross Country Championships, I read more into these
last few words than the casual fan might have done. To me, they signaled
that Bekele intended to run very fast indeed and that he wished to show one
man in particular “what he could do.”
Eliud Kipchoge and Kenenisa Bekele had been rivals since 2003, when
the latter nipped the former by 0.35 seconds in a 5000-meter race in Oslo.
The pair had met again 19 times thereafter, Bekele coming out ahead in 13
of these races but losing all 4 of the marathons they’d started together. Now
in the twilight of his illustrious career, Bekele might have had his last
--- PAGE 22 ---
chance to cross a finish line in front of his Kenyan nemesis, but taking
down his world record would certainly qualify as the next best thing.
My interpretation of Bekele’s pre-race comments was validated the next
morning when a small lead pack headed by a pair of striped-vested pacers
passed through 5 km in 14:24, well ahead of the stated pace and precisely
matching Kipchoge’s split from the previous year. In the center of the
scrum, a relaxed Bekele looked almost as if he were napping on his feet,
waiting for the real start of the race. When you’ve watched a runner
compete as many times as I’ve watched Bekele, you can tell by the subtlest
cues if he’s got his best stuff on a given day, and I could tell by Bekele’s
half-lidded eyes that he had good legs on this particular day, and he knew it.
A shrunken lead group passed through 10 km 1 second ahead of
Kipchoge’s record pace and remained a single tick to the good at the
halfway point. I knew this could be no accident. Bekele was going for it!
The problem, though, was that Kipchoge had sped up significantly in the
second half of his record-breaking performance, and Bekele would have to
do the same to snatch the coveted title from his rival. Yet Bekele continued
to snooze even after the pacers peeled off, leaving him with only a pair of
less heralded compatriots to share the work, and by the time they reached
25 km, the Ethiopian trio had fallen 6 seconds behind the invisible specter
of Kipchoge.
Approaching 30 km, and another 4 seconds off Kipchoge’s standard, 25-
year-old Birhanu Legese launched an attack of his own. Sisay Lemma
covered it quickly, but Bekele was gapped. Grimacing, he locked his now
wide-open eyes on Legese’s back like the threat it was, skipping his next
drink bottle to save the fraction of a second that grabbing it would have cost
him, but it was no use. The aggressor continued to pull away, shaking off
Lemma within a few blocks on his way to passing 35 km with a 13-second
advantage on the greatest of all time.
The thing is, Bekele hadn’t actually slowed down. In fact, he hit 35 km
having recorded his own fastest 5K split of the day, and the grimace was
gone. A nervous glance back from Legese affirmed what, by then, Bekele
already understood—the younger man was faltering. Bekele came after him
like an assassin. Alone in my home office in California, I began to holler at
my computer screen.
--- PAGE 23 ---
Just past 37 km, Bekele overtook Legese with brutal authority, as though
the would-be usurper were already forgotten, which in fact he was. Back on
world-record pace, Bekele was now chasing someone else, present but
unseen.
The next 12 minutes were as thrilling as any athletic spectacle I’ve
witnessed. A famously graceful runner, Bekele ran more beautifully than I
could ever hope to describe in those last few solitary minutes on Berlin’s
Teutonically perfect streets, his trademark sprinter’s back kick in full effect,
head rocking ever so slightly in small concession to fatigue, checking his
watch frequently, as though he heard the television commentators raving
about how close it was going to be.
More than beautiful, Bekele’s self-sacrificial charge to the finish line was
heroic, the stuff of legend, an aging champion’s all-costs bid to etch one last
triumph into his legacy. Bekele shot through Brandenburg Gate at 2:00:39
on the race clock, leaving precisely 1 minute to close the deal. The crowd
waiting on the other side went berserk. Wincing with effort, Bekele tried to
accelerate but couldn’t, for he was already going full gas and had been for
some time. The video feed now switched to a camera stationed behind the
finish line. I saw Bekele grinding. I saw the clock ticking up, counting
down. It was impossible to judge the distance. Could he do it? 2:01:31, 32,
33 . . .
Two seconds. He missed by 2 seconds! That’s 0.02 percent. Yet Bekele
was far from disappointed by the oh-so-near miss. “I knew I was very close
to the record, but I couldn’t quite make it,” he told reporters at a post-race
press conference. “Before the race, I did not expect a world record, so I am
very happy to take 80 seconds off my personal best.”
As a fan of elite running, I love this performance for its poetry and
drama. But as a coach, I see it as the epitome of race execution.
Defining the Perfect Race
A perfect race is one that the runner could not have completed any faster. If
a runner completes a marathon in 2:01:41, and the fastest time they were
capable of achieving on that day is also 2:01:41, then the runner ran a
perfect race. That’s simple enough. But how do we know if a runner has
completed a race in the least time possible?
--- PAGE 24 ---
We don’t. Like it or not, we cannot definitively determine whether a
runner fulfills 100 percent of their potential in a given race. Of course, there
are many cases where it is obvious that a runner has fallen short of their
potential. In the preceding chapter, I mentioned that I started my first
marathon way too fast and found myself walking at 19 miles. I came into
that marathon having recently run a half-marathon in 1:18:46, which
according to the Run Fast Coach online calculator predicts a marathon time
of 2:44:01. My actual finish time was a far-from-perfect 3:38:40. But when
no obvious errors are made in the execution of a race, it becomes a lot
harder—impossible, in fact—to determine whether the runner could have
squeezed out a few more seconds by doing something differently.
We know enough from the scientific study of endurance pacing, however,
to identify race performances that are at least close to perfect. The hallmark
characteristic of a “perfect” race is a steady work rate from start to finish.
The scientific definition of work rate is energy expenditure over time,
measured as calories (or kilojoules) per minute. On a flat racecourse such as
Berlin’s, work rate closely matches pace. Kenenisa Bekele’s 5 km split
times at Berlin in 2019 were 14:24, 14:29, 14:37, 14:29, 14:32, 14:26, and
14:20; his momentary speed never strayed more than 1.7 percent above or
below the median for the race as a whole. That’s about as steady as you can
get in a race of such length.
Evidence that a consistent work rate is optimal comes from dozens of
studies assessing the relationship between pacing and performance not just
in running events but in other types of endurance competitions as well. A
2023 study led by Sabrina Demarie of the University of Rome, for example,
found that elite 1500-meter swimmers paced themselves more evenly than
less experienced junior swimmers and that steadier pacing was associated
with faster finish times at both levels. A prior study appearing in the
International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance noted that the
closer an individual athlete’s first-lap run pace was to their average pace for
the four-lap run leg of the 2009 European Triathlon Championship, the
faster their overall run time was. That same year, Jo Corbett of the
University of Portsmouth reported in the International Journal of Sports
Physiology and Performance that World Championship track cyclists in the
3 km and 4 km events finished faster overall when there was less variation
in speed between their first and final laps.
--- PAGE 25 ---
The data from running events tells the same story. In 2021, a graduate
student in exercise science at the University of Maine named Brendan
Gilpatrick analyzed results from the previous year’s HURT100
ultramarathon in search of correlations between specific pacing patterns and
performance. After dividing the finishers into three groups based on how
well they placed, he found that the fastest group exhibited the least variation
in pace over the course of 100 miles.
The same pattern holds at shorter, more popular race distances. In 2011,
Thomas Haney and John Mercer of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas,
analyzed data files uploaded to Garmin Connect by 285 participants in two
separate marathons. Similar to Gilpatrick, these researchers found that
steadier pacing led to faster finish times, with very few exceptions.
Even at the elite level, where the goal is not necessarily to run as fast as
possible but to beat as many other runners as possible, less variation in
speed is associated with greater success. This was shown in a 2021 study
led by Brett Kirby of the Nike Research Lab, who used the personal-best
race times of elite male runners entered in the 5000-meter and 10,000-meter
events at the 2017 IAAF World Outdoor Championships as a basis for
comparing how individual athletes “should” have performed against how
they actually performed as a result of their race execution. What he found
was that the more time a runner spent above their estimated critical speed
(an important physiological threshold above which fatigue builds rapidly)
prior to the final lap, the farther back they finished. This finding would not
be particularly noteworthy if the runners with the fastest critical speeds had
spent the least time above this threshold and finished highest. But in fact,
like most championship track events, the two races Kirby analyzed featured
significant oscillations in pace at the front, and it was the runners who did
the best job of staying within themselves despite these oscillations who
performed best, regardless of personal bests.
Here’s the Fine Print
No runner ever completes a race at a perfectly consistent work rate. Hills,
winds, turns, terrain, aid stations, and other runners all but force runners to
vary their work rate. Apart from these external factors, internal factors also
cause pace to fluctuate. Studies have shown that running at any given speed
--- PAGE 26 ---
feels harder on a treadmill than it does outdoors, likely because our bodies
don’t like to feel locked into a rigidly unvarying speed. This may explain
why elite runners never match their speed perfectly to the Wavelight
electronic pacers made available to them for world-record attempts.
Scientists refer to the gentle undulation in pace that comes naturally to
human runners as stochastic variation, which is distinct from the conscious
fluctuations that occur during “good patches” and “bad patches”—peaks
and valleys in perceived effort that would be foolish to ignore.
For all of these reasons, absolute consistency in work rate is neither
possible nor desirable in races. Another caveat to the steadiness principle in
pacing is what I call the latitude exception. Simply stated, runners execute
seemingly perfect races with more than one pacing strategy. In 2019, Brigid
Kosgei used even splits to set a women’s marathon world record of 2:14:04
in Chicago, running the first half in 1:07:05 and the second in 1:06:59.
Three years later, Eliud Kipchoge used positive splits to lower his own
world record, passing the halfway mark in 59:51 in an attempt to break 2
hours (something he’d done previously in a non-record-eligible exhibition)
before fading to a second-half split of 1:01:18, which was still good enough
to lower his world record by 30 seconds. And in 2023, defending champion
Tigst Assefa came to Berlin looking to break Kosgei’s women’s world
record. She started right on pace, reaching the midpoint in 1:06:20, but felt
so strong that she sped up from there, using a negative split of 1:05:33 to
lop more than 2.5 minutes off the record.
Even when positive and negative splits are used to achieve near-perfect
performances, though, variation in pace is highly constrained. Kipchoge
slowed down 2.4 percent between the first and second halves of the 2022
Berlin Marathon, while Assefa sped up by 1.9 percent in her record-
breaking performance. The average recreational runner, meanwhile, slows
by an average of 10 percent in the second half of a marathon.
Another limited exception to the steadiness principle is event specificity.
Optimal pacing looks somewhat different at different race distances, a
phenomenon that is believed to reflect the disparate causes of fatigue in
shorter and longer events. In elite 800-meter races, which take less than 2
minutes for top runners to complete, the winner almost always runs a
positive split, covering the second lap a bit slower than the first. In the
longer track events—from 1500 meters to 10,000 meters—a J-shaped
--- PAGE 27 ---
pacing pattern is associated with the best performances. Runners start fast,
settle in, and finish even faster than they started. Half-marathons and
marathons are typically won with even splits or nominally positive or
negative splits, and in ultramarathons, everyone slows down, though higher
finishers slow less.
Again, however, these exceptions to the steadiness principle are tightly
constrained among the top performers. When Athing Mu set an American
record of 1:55.04 for 800 meters at the 2003 Prefontaine Classic, her second
lap was a half second slower than the first—technically a positive split, but
c’mon! And when Jakob Ingebrigtsen set a world record of 4:43.13 for 2000
meters earlier that same year, his split times for the race’s five laps did
indeed follow a classic J-shape pattern, but just barely (56.67, 56.77, 57.35,
57.33, and 55.00 seconds).
All in all, the one major difference between a poorly or decently paced
race and a perfectly paced race is that there is less variation in work rate in
the latter.
Why Even Pacing Works Best
Having demonstrated to your satisfaction that, minor caveats
notwithstanding, consistent pacing produces the best results, I will now
address the question that is begged by this reality: Why?
The answer lies in the study by Brett Kirby described in the previous
section. As mentioned, Kirby’s key finding was that the more time a runner
spent above their critical speed prior to the crucial last lap of a
championship 5000-meter or 10,000-meter race, the farther back they
finished. That’s because fatigue happens a lot faster above critical speed,
where the body loses metabolic homeostasis, than below it, where
homeostasis is maintained. There’s only so much time a runner can
accumulate above critical speed in a single race before they’re toast, and it
can’t be undone by slowing down.
Suppose your critical speed is 6 meters per second. In theory, a runner
could oscillate between 6.2 m/s and 5.8 m/s throughout a race and end up
finishing in the same time they would achieve by running steady at 6.0 m/s.
In reality, however, this can’t happen because the runner will fatigue
exponentially faster at 6.2 m/s than they will at 6.0 m/s, hastening
--- PAGE 28 ---
exhaustion to a degree they can’t make up for by periodically slowing down
to 5.8 m/s to regain homeostasis.
The typical trained runner can sustain their critical speed for about 30
minutes. What this means is that races that take substantially less than 30
minutes to complete are performed entirely above critical speed, while races
that take substantially longer than 30 minutes to complete are performed
entirely below it. Obviously, the effect of crossing the critical speed
threshold has no relevance in these shorter and longer races, yet steady
pacing remains optimal because it has a lower energy cost than variable
pacing at intensities both above and below the critical speed, even when the
average speed is the same. This was shown in a study led by Erik Kolsung
of the Norwegian University of Science and Technology and published in
Frontiers in Physiology in 2020. Fifteen elite cyclists completed four rides
lasting 20 minutes apiece, two at low intensity and two at high intensity.
One ride at each intensity was done at a steady power output, the other at a
variable output with a matching average wattage for the full 20 minutes. At
both intensities, the total energy cost was higher with variable pacing, as
were blood lactate levels, indicating that the cyclists would have exhausted
themselves sooner with this pacing pattern had the tests continued beyond
20 minutes.
It’s as if each athlete is given a matchbook at the start of a race, and it
contains just enough matches to last them until they finish, provided their
average burn rate is, say, two matches per minute. When the athlete runs at
the highest work rate they can sustain for the full distance, they burn
precisely two matches per minute. When they run a little slower, they burn
one match per minute. But when they run a little faster, they burn not three
but four matches per minute. To avoid draining their supply of matches
prematurely, the runner may either stick to the highest sustainable work rate
from start to finish or spend 2 minutes running a little slower for every
minute they run faster, and you don’t have to be John Nash to know which
option will result in the faster time.
Not All Steadiness Is Equal
All this talk about steadiness and consistency demands clarification. Stable
pacing is not the goal of racing. If it were, then perfect race execution
--- PAGE 29 ---
would be the easiest thing in the world. All you’d have to do is start out
walking and keep walking at the same steady pace until you finished. What
makes perfect execution far from easy is that the true goal of racing is to
finish in the least time possible, and stable pacing just happens to be a
requirement thereof. Of all the paces you might hold steadily in a race, only
one will get you to the finish line in minimal time, and that’s the pace
associated with your highest sustainable work rate for that particular race on
that day.
Okay, fine. But how do you know if the steady pace you managed to hold
from the beginning of a race to the end was in fact the fastest pace you were
capable of sustaining that day? The surest indicator is what I call the
underwhelming finishing kick. We’re all familiar with the phenomenon of
the finishing kick (also known as the end spurt). When a runner comes
within sight of the finish line, they switch from a paced effort, where they
are deliberately running slower than they could to ensure they don’t exhaust
themselves prematurely, to an all-out sprint, emptying the tank in an effort
to shave a few seconds when there is no longer any risk of premature
exhaustion.
The speed of a runner’s finishing kick depends on two factors. The first is
how good they are at sprinting. At all levels of the sport, some runners have
a stronger kick than others. The second factor is how tired the runner is
when they initiate their kick. The more energy they’ve saved for the end of
the race, the more they’ll be able to accelerate. But while a speedy kick is
fun to watch, it is actually evidence of imperfect pacing, as Barry Smyth of
University College Dublin pointed out in a 2018 study on marathon pacing.
After analyzing the split-time data of more than 1.7 million marathon
finishers, Smyth found that not only were aggressive starts associated with
slower finish times as a result of bonking but fast finishes were “also
associated with slower finish times because they sometimes signal cautious
pacing earlier in the race, as if runners are holding back for a final sprint.”
In a perfectly executed race, the runner chooses a steady work rate that
leaves them with just enough energy to avoid slowing down on the
homestretch or perhaps to pick up their pace ever so slightly, because the
few seconds they lose as a consequence of failing to unleash a blistering
dash to the line are made up for many times over by the faster pace they
maintained from the start.
--- PAGE 31 ---
The Unseen Part of Perfect Pacing
Figures 1.1 and 1.2 show what a perfectly executed marathon (specifically,
Kenenisa Bekele’s 2019 Berlin Marathon performance) and a typical
marathon look like in graphical form. As you can see, they’re very different.
However, from the perspective of a marathon spectator standing curbside at
the event’s 5-mile mark, perfect execution and typical execution look the
same. All they see are two runners running.
Figure 1.1. Kenenisa Bekele’s pace in the 2019 Berlin Marathon

--- PAGE 32 ---
Figure 1.2. Typical marathon pacing
To fully appreciate what it takes to execute the perfect race, we must peer
inside the mind of the pacing master. When we do, we discover three key
traits that distinguish runners capable of perfect execution from those not
yet so capable: body awareness, toughness, and judgment.
Body awareness (or what scientists call somatic awareness) relates to a
runner’s feel for their performance limits. Although pacing can be assisted
by objective data (as evidenced by Bekele’s frequent watch glances), it is
done mainly by feel. All competitive runners share a common goal of
reaching the finish line in the least time possible. Throughout each race, a
single question looms: Can I sustain this effort level for the remaining
distance? The answer comes not in the form of numbers or words but as
perceptions, a continuous evaluation of present levels of effort and fatigue
in relation to past experience. That same looming question could also be
formulated this way: Am I feeling how I should be feeling at this point of the
race?
Some runners are better than others at reading these perceptions, and
Bekele showed exquisite sensitivity to his limits in Berlin, most obviously
when he held steady instead of answering Legese’s attack, but not only
then. When Bekele said after the race that he did not expect a world record,
I took him at his word. Why, then, did he start the marathon smack on
record pace? Because every pacing master knows better than to allow
expectations to rule their performance. Goals and expectations provide a
--- PAGE 33 ---
good starting point for successful race execution, but that’s all they do.
When the gun goes off and you start moving, you need to be willing and
able to adjust your effort appropriately based on external conditions and
also on disparities between how you expected to feel and how you actually
feel.
For the runner, such adjustments can go in either of two directions. While
it’s more common to sense the need to dial back one’s effort from the
expected or desired pace in response to adverse conditions or shaky legs,
there are occasional, special races in which the perceptive runner discovers
that they are capable of something remarkable, as Bekele did in Berlin. But
a single early adjustment is not enough. Optimal pacing is a matter of
incessant fine-tuning, as Bekele demonstrated in taking full advantage of
the opportunity he discerned when he came out the other side of his rough
patch.
Which brings us to judgment. Bekele’s decision to let Legese and Lemma
get away from him between 30 and 37 km was just that: a decision, and one
that not every runner would have made. In his post-race remarks, Bekele
revealed that his left hamstring had tightened up when he’d tried to answer
Legese’s surge, hence the grimace. Although frustrated by the ill-timed
anatomical malfunction, Bekele knew better than to resist it, so he shifted
his focus from staying with the leader to limiting his losses and remaining
in a position to take advantage of Legese’s faltering, should it happen. And
it did happen, because Legese had made a mistake—specifically, a pacing
mistake—in surging too hard too early in the race. In fact, he wound up
finishing more than a minute behind his elder.
To fully capitalize on the opportunity his body awareness and judgment
had created, Bekele needed to exercise the third key aptitude for pacing
mastery: toughness. Most runners are tough, but Bekele demonstrated a rare
kind of toughness in going after Kipchoge’s world record in the “I-don’t-
care-how-much-it-hurts” manner that he did. There is no way to objectively
measure how hard one is trying in a race. A runner might feel they tried as
hard as they could in a race only to plunge even deeper into the pain cave in
the next one, when perhaps there’s more at stake. In running, the limit is
always mental, the pain tank filling before the gas tank empties,1 and the
tougher a runner is, the closer they can get to their physical limit before
they hit their invisible—but no less real—mental limit.
--- PAGE 34 ---
Your Perfect Race
Kenenisa Bekele is far more talented than you or me. But that’s not why he
ran a 2:01:41 marathon. He ran a 2:01:41 marathon because he got the most
out of his talent by drawing upon his body awareness, toughness, and
judgment to execute a perfect race. You and I can forgive ourselves for not
being as talented as Bekele, but can we excuse ourselves for not getting the
most out of our talent?
There are those who try to excuse setting a low bar for themselves as
runners. They look at studies linking steadier pacing with better
performance and claim that talent is somehow responsible for both. Google
the phrase “negative splits unrealistic for most runners” and you’ll see what
I mean. The problem with these efforts to justify soft standards for race
execution is that science offers irrefutable proof that most nonelite runners
pace themselves suboptimally and can do better with a little help.
An ingenious experiment designed by Claire Molinari of the University
of Paris-Saclay and published in the International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health in 2021 is one example. Eight recreational
runners were asked to complete a set of four 3000-meter time trials. The
first was self-paced and served to establish a baseline. In the remaining
three time trials, the runners were required to maintain a steady state
defined by the average speed, the average rate of oxygen consumption, or
the average heart rate recorded in the first time trial. Collective finish times
were 6.4 percent, 14 percent, and 12.4 percent faster, respectively, in the
three steady-state time trials than in the freely paced time trial. The average
finish time in the fastest time trial, regulated by oxygen consumption, was
12:20, compared to 14:14 in the freely paced time trial. Same runners, same
level of fitness; the only difference was pacing.
The lesson of this study is not that runners should complete each race at a
fixed rate of oxygen consumption. That’s not how perfect races are
executed in the real world (although the physiologically governed time
trials did result in pacing patterns that more closely resembled those
exhibited by elite runners in middle-distance events). The lesson, rather, is
that most runners race a lot slower than they could with science-backed
guidance. Honestly, as esoteric as Molinari’s guidance might seem, all it
really did was force runners to be more consistent than they were on their
own and to push harder.
--- PAGE 35 ---
You’ve come to the right place for science-backed guidance on pacing to
help you achieve performance leaps similar to those enjoyed by the runners
in Molinari’s study. But before we get to that, let’s first dive deeper into the
fascinating science of pacing and its surprising history.
1 There are exceptions—in an all-out sprint, runners do encounter physical limits, and endurance
races often conclude with an all-out sprint to the finish line. I’ll say more about this phenomenon
in the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 36 ---
2
The Science of Pacing
As much as I would like to say I wrote the book on pacing, that honor
belongs to Andrew Edwards and Remco Polman, who coauthored Pacing in
Sport and Exercise in 2011. I did, however, write the foreword to that
groundbreaking volume, which I was privileged to read ahead of its public
release. More than a decade later, I’m still able to recite from memory the
authors’ definition of pacing: “The goal-directed distribution and
management of effort across the duration of an exercise bout.” There’s a lot
packed into this short statement, including concepts of self-regulation and
effort perception that are well worth exploring in depth. But first let’s talk
about the “goal-directed” part.
Since the beginning, scientific efforts to understand pacing have focused
on the concept of the limit, and rightly so. All types of human performance,
including running, are defined by their limiters. To understand what stops
people from going faster, higher, or farther than they do is to understand
how they go as fast, as high, and as far as they do. The thing that makes
running, and especially distance running, different from other types of
human performance is that the nature of the limiter is not self-evident. In a
sprint, the limiter is seemingly obvious: speed. One can dig a little deeper
and ask whether sprint performance is limited by how quickly an athlete
can turn over their legs or by how much directional force they can apply to
the ground with their foot, but such questions are answered relatively easily
(turns out, it’s the latter). In longer events, the limit is a lot fuzzier. At
almost any point in a 1-mile track race or a 100-mile trail ultramarathon, a
runner could, if they chose to, run faster than they are. So it’s not a speed
issue. But if not that, then what? Answering this question is key to
unlocking the mystery of pacing. All runners seek their performance limit in
races. Pacing is the tool we use to find our limit. But what the heck is the
limiter?
--- PAGE 37 ---
In Search of the Limit
Science is essentially a formalized effort to overcome bias. It’s an effort that
never fully succeeds, however, because science is practiced by the same
biased humans who seek to overcome their natural biases in practicing it.
The quest to understand pacing has been tainted by two biases in particular.
The first is an abiding tendency to privilege the physical (i.e., the body)
over the nonphysical (the mind). The second is a propensity to overlook the
nonmeasurable or not-yet-measurable in favor of the measurable. If not for
these twin biases, scientists might have solved the mystery of pacing more
than a century earlier than they did.
The first modern theory of human endurance was entirely biological in
nature, overlooking the mind altogether. Its creator was Archibald Vivian
Hill, who published under the name A. V. Hill and is widely regarded as the
father of exercise science. Born in 1886 in Bristol, England, and educated at
Cambridge University (where he also ran track), Hill began to study the
physiology of muscle contractions in 1909. His interest in the phenomenon
was sparked by the then recent discovery that muscles have the ability to
contract without a supply of oxygen. Prior to this discovery, oxygen was
believed to be an absolute requirement for muscle contraction. Hill’s work
took the newfound existence of anaerobic (meaning “without oxygen”)
muscle metabolism as its starting point and yielded many additional
discoveries.
In the early 1920s, Hill came up with the concept of oxygen debt, for
which he was awarded a Nobel Prize. His key insight was that, although the
muscles are able to perform a limited amount of work in the absence of
oxygen by turning glycogen (the storage form of glucose in the muscles and
liver) into lactate, eventually this lactate has to be turned back into glycogen
with the help of oxygen. Hill’s own experience on the track (he had a PB of
4:45 in the mile) fed into this realization. He’d always wondered why his
breathing rate remained elevated for a few minutes after a hard workout or
race and then gradually returned to normal. The concept of oxygen debt
helped explain what the body was trying to accomplish through this
process.
Hill’s next step was to test his insight on athletes, including himself, by
tasking them to run around an 85-meter track while breathing into a mask
that collected exhaled gases in a bag worn like a backpack. The specific
--- PAGE 38 ---
protocol Hill devised required subjects to go faster and faster until they
reached exhaustion, a type of endurance test that became known as an open
loop because there was no predetermined endpoint. Through such
experiments, Hill learned that each person has a maximal rate of oxygen
consumption that is highly correlated with their maximal sustained running
speed. Today we refer to this limit as aerobic capacity, or VO2max. All
runners consume more oxygen as they run faster, and the fastest runners are
able to consume the most oxygen, but even they reach a limit eventually,
and exhaustion soon follows.
Hill pegged the heart muscle as the source of this limit. When intense
exercise is sustained, he believed, the heart can’t supply enough oxygen to
the working muscles to meet their energy needs, causing the muscles to
make up the balance by turning glycogen into lactate without oxygen. But
only so much oxygen debt and lactate can accumulate before the muscles
fail, at which point the athlete must slow down or stop so that oxygen can
be made available in sufficient quantities to turn the accumulated lactate
back into glycogen.
Hill now stood just one small step away from formulating a theory of
pacing. He had identified the limiter of endurance exercise—or so he
thought. All that was left for him to do was to figure out how athletes
manage to reach but not exceed their limit in competition. Oddly, Hill never
took this final step. The reason, I suspect, has to do with the open-loop
nature of his experiments, where subjects ran at incrementally increasing
speeds to the point of failure. This format made sense in that it was the
failure point that Hill was most interested in. He wanted to know what
caused an athlete to stop when they did. The problem, however, was that
there was no self-pacing element in this protocol. The pace was set by the
experimenter, not the runner, who was required to keep accelerating on
command until they couldn’t. This is completely different from an actual
race, which is a closed-loop endurance test where each athlete regulates
their own pace. Steeped as Hill was in his experimental design, it seems to
have never crossed his mind to explain how pacing operated in relation to
the hard limit of muscle failure.
Fortunately, the next generation of exercise scientists stepped up to
develop a theory of pacing that was consistent with Hill’s biological
explanation of human endurance. Less fortunately, it wasn’t a very good
--- PAGE 39 ---
theory. What these midcentury bioreductionists proposed was that athletes
somehow automatically race at the highest speed they can sustain without
causing their muscles to fail before they reach the finish line. A key
contributor to this literally mindless theory of pacing was David Costill,
who did his most important work at Ball State University in Muncie,
Indiana. In 1978, Costill led an experiment in which lactate levels were
measured in 18 runners as they completed time trials and races of various
distances ranging from 3.2 kilometers to a marathon. As expected, lactate
levels were found to be higher in shorter events run at faster speeds and
lower in longer events run at lower speeds. At all distances, however,
performance was highly correlated with the subjects’ maximal lactate
steady-state (MLSS) running speed, or the highest speed each runner was
able to sustain in a separate test without going into oxygen debt. On the
basis of this finding, Costill’s team concluded that “runners may set a race
pace which closely approximates the running velocity at which lactate
begins to accumulate.”
Absent from this study was any effort to explain how runners identify the
velocity at which lactate begins to accumulate. One thing is certain:
Runners don’t wear lactate meters that enable them to stay just below the
allowable limit in the same way that motorists use their speedometer to stay
below the legal speed limit. This left only two possibilities, assuming
Costill’s speculation was correct. One was that the brain possessed some
sort of hidden internal lactate meter that monitored blood lactate and
enforced a limit in the way a thermostat enforces a temperature limit. The
other was blind trial and error—an unconstrained process whereby runners
find out the hard way how fast they can go without exceeding the lactate
limit at each race distance. Neither of these possibilities had any empirical
backing. People don’t feel their blood lactate level the way they feel other
things, like body temperature. And as for the second possibility, while it is
true that most runners are bad at pacing initially and get better over time,
they aren’t nearly as bad as we would expect them to be if their pacing
decisions were entirely a matter of trial and error.
Another problem with Costill’s conclusion that lactate accumulation
limits performance at a range of exercise intensities is the fact that, as
Costill himself observed, lactate levels vary widely in races of different
distances. If lactate really caused muscle failure, it would do so at one
specific level. In response to this criticism, believers in a strictly biological
--- PAGE 40 ---
model of endurance broadened it to encompass other mechanisms of
fatigue. The revised explanation of pacing that came out of this effort
proposed that fatigue was caused by different mechanisms in different
situations. In a short test lasting only a few minutes, for example, fatigue
might be caused by muscle cell depolarization (the same mechanism that
causes batteries to fail), whereas in a longer test, it might be caused by a
core body temperature increase, muscle damage, or glycogen depletion.
What did not change in this modified model, however, was the general
idea that endurance performance was limited by physiological failure. All it
did was multiply the types of failure that might occur, and in so doing, it
multiplied the pacing problem, offering no answer to the question of how
athletes regulate their effort in such a way as to just barely avoid whichever
specific type of failure would occur first in a particular event.
But there was an even bigger problem: Endurance performance is not
actually limited by physiological failures of any kind. It’s true that intense
and prolonged exercise causes all sorts of disruptions to biological
homeostasis. Lactate levels increase, pH levels decrease, cellular damage
occurs, glycogen levels drop, core body temperature climbs, and more. But
in study after study after study, researchers found that none of these
disruptions ever reached a point where it could have directly forced an
athlete to stop exercising involuntarily.
The final experimental nail in the coffin of the biological model of
exercise tolerance came in the form of a meticulously designed study by
Spanish researchers that appeared in the Journal of Physiology in 2015. Its
aim was to exercise volunteers to the point of exhaustion in a variety of
ways and measure absolutely everything to find out once and for all which
specific physiological breakdown, if any, set the limit. Twenty-two subjects
performed 10-second, all-out sprints on stationary bikes, recovered fully,
and then pedaled at incrementally increasing power levels to failure—not
once but on multiple occasions, with new wrinkles added each time. In half
of the tests, the subjects breathed regular air, while in the other half, they
breathed oxygen-poor air, simulating high altitude. After quitting each test,
the subjects rested for either 10 seconds or 1 minute, with either a normal
blood supply to the legs or a constricted blood supply, and then repeated the
all-out, 10-second sprints. Among the measurements taken during and after
each variation were blood lactate level, muscle pH, and adenosine
--- PAGE 41 ---
triphosphate (ATP) level (ATP being the muscle cells’ fundamental energy
currency).
The results showed that neither lack of energy supply to the muscles nor
chemical disruptions within the muscles could explain the subjects’ quitting.
For example, when blood supply to the legs was constricted, the subjects
were able to produce more power in a 10-second sprint after 1 minute of
recovery than after 10 seconds of recovery, which one would intuitively
expect. Yet lactate levels were higher and pH levels were lower after the
longer recovery, which was a problem for the idea that either high lactate
levels or low pH levels caused exhaustion. Having no other option, the
researchers concluded, “At the end of an incremental exercise to
exhaustion, a large functional reserve remains in the muscles to generate
power, even at levels far above the power output at which task failure
occurs.”
In lay terms, this means the subjects were physically able to keep
exercising at the time they stopped. There was no physiological failure.
Crazy, right? But facts are facts. The great thing about science is that,
although susceptible to bias, it is self-correcting. Given time, it exposes its
biases, opening the door to a truer truth. To the (ironic) credit of science,
exercise scientists who believed that exhaustion is caused by physiological
breakdown were the ones to prove that exhaustion is not caused by
physiological breakdown. Which meant that pacing could not be a
physiological process. Which meant that pacing remained unexplained.
Common Sense to the Rescue
A. V. Hill’s biological model of exercise tolerance actually fell apart long
before the Spanish study just described buried it once and for all. The
inability of its proponents to produce a scintilla of proof that endurance
performance was limited by any specific physiological breakdown was
common knowledge within the field of exercise physiology as early as the
1990s. Then in 1996, a South African medical doctor turned exercise
physiologist proposed an alternative model of exercise tolerance, which
shifted the performance limiter from the body to the brain. Tim Noakes
argued that, during exercise, the brain receives continuous feedback from
various organs and systems of the body—chemical and electrical
--- PAGE 42 ---
information streams that enable the brain to monitor things like core body
temperature, blood glucose, and hydration; to assess the athlete’s well-being
from moment to moment; and to react protectively when necessary. If the
feedback coming into the brain signals an impending crisis—hyperthermia,
hyponatremia, or whatever—the brain, acting as a kind of governor (hence
the model’s name: the central governor theory), automatically reduces
muscle activation, causing the athlete to slow down involuntarily. And
there’s your limit—not physiological failure but the threat thereof.
Pacing, according to this theory, is all about anticipation. Writing in 2011,
Noakes explained, “The goal of pacing is to maintain homeostasis and to
prevent a catastrophic physiological failure. Multiple, independent systems
in the periphery provide sensory feedback that influences central motor
drive from the brain to the exercising muscles. The outcome of this
information is the pacing strategy that develops during exercise.” The
governor, then, is a brain-based mechanism that estimates the maximum
speed that can be safely sustained over an expected duration and actively
enforces this limit.
The central governor theory made a huge impact, not only within
exercise science but also beyond it, influencing endurance coaches and
athletes all over the world. It had problems of its own, however. Some
critics pointed out that if the central governor existed, then we ought to be
able to find it. After all, plenty is known about which specific parts of the
brain handle different functions. If you’re startled by a sudden movement in
the periphery of your vision, blame the amygdala. If you succeed in
resisting the temptation to eat a cookie you know you don’t need, credit the
anterior cingulate cortex. Yet despite rapid advances in functional brain
imaging and related technologies, nobody has been able to pinpoint a
specific brain structure that holds runners back automatically, by just the
right amount, in a race.
Another problem was that the central governor theory completely ignored
a little thing called consciousness, assigning no role to the thoughts and
perceptions we all experience in our efforts to pace our runs. To the extent
that Noakes’s theory made sense, it did so for zombies, not humans. In
response to this second criticism, Noakes revised the theory to make space
for conscious brain operations, but this only opened the door to another
criticism: If pacing can’t be explained without reference to conscious
--- PAGE 43 ---
thoughts and perceptions, what need is there for an unconscious central
governor that can’t even be found?
Among Noakes’s favorite “proofs” of the existence of a central governor
that controls pacing was the well-known “end spurt” phenomenon, whereby
athletes abruptly speed up at the end of a long race, just when (according to
A. V. Hill’s model of exercise tolerance) they are presumably nearest to
their physical limit. Noakes was certainly right to point out that the strict
biological explanation of pacing did not account for this almost universal
phenomenon. But in an attention-grabbing 2008 paper published in the
European Journal of Applied Physiology, a brash young Italian exercise
scientist named Samuele Marcora challenged Noakes’s own explanation of
the end spurt and offered a more human, less zombielike alternative.
Marcora’s simpler explanation for the end spurt was that athletes use a
combination of perceived exertion (a.k.a. perceived effort) and awareness of
where they are within a race to make conscious pacing choices that ensure
they “save something” for the end, at which point they go ahead and empty
the tank. Because runners cannot precisely anticipate how things will stand
near the end of a race, Marcora argued, and because finishing the race is
paramount, “athletes usually choose a slightly conservative pace for most of
the race. Near the end of the race, when the information provided by the
conscious sensation of effort at a certain running speed is more reliable,
most ‘conservative’ athletes realize that they can significantly increase
running speed without reaching exhaustion before the finishing line, and
decide to go for an end-spurt. No additional subconscious intelligent system
is needed, just our conscious brain.”
In 2009, 1 year after his editorial appeared, Marcora introduced his own
theory of endurance limits, which he called the psychobiological model of
exercise tolerance. According to this new model, the true limiter of
endurance performance is neither the body’s functional capacity nor a
brain-based protective reflex that keeps us from exceeding our physical
capacity but conscious self-regulation, where sensations and behavior are
controlled through deliberate decisions made in pursuit of goals.
In a stark break from exercise science tradition, Marcora based his model
not on biochemistry but on psychology, specifically on a construct known
as motivational intensity theory. Developed by Jack Brehm in the 1980s,
motivational intensity theory asserts that people enter into difficult tasks,
--- PAGE 44 ---
whether physical or mental, with a certain degree of potential motivation
that predetermines the maximal amount of effort they are willing to exert to
achieve their goal. If this limit is exceeded before the goal has been
achieved, they disengage. Marcora proposed that endurance racing is like
any other task in that when an athlete hits the proverbial wall in a race, it is
not because the body has encountered a physical limit but rather because
the athlete has decided that the effort required to keep pushing is too great.
It’s not that physical limits don’t exist—they’re just never actually
encountered in the endurance context because one of two things always
happens first: The goal is achieved, or the effort required to continue
pursuing the goal exceeds the athlete’s potential motivation and the athlete
backs off by choice.
What makes endurance exercise different from other tasks is the specific
form that effort takes. In most everyday tasks, such as desk work and
parenting, effort takes the form of a nebulous mix of internal resources such
as concentration and willpower. In running, however, the dominant form of
effort is perceived effort. In a 2010 paper, Samuele Marcora defined this
critical concept as follows: “Perception of effort, also known as perceived
exertion or sense of effort, refers to the conscious sensation of how hard,
heavy, and strenuous a physical task is. This perception depends mainly on
feelings of effort in the active limbs, and the sensation of heavy breathing (a
type of dyspnea).” I will explain how the brain generates this perception in
Chapter 5, but for now, it’s sufficient to note that as the intensity of running
increases and as fatigue sets in, perceived effort rises, becoming more and
more uncomfortable. If running continues, the runner will eventually reach
a perceived effort level that they feel is intolerable, at which point they will
quit. The true limiter of endurance performance, then, is a feeling.
Psychological Limits
This is a good place to mention that it’s not only scientists who tend to be
dismissive of the nonphysical and nonmeasurable. We all are. We are
therefore prone to thinking of psychological limits as being less real than
physical limits, and yet they aren’t. Take pain, for example. Studies of pain
tolerance have found that everyone has a limit as to how much pain they
can tolerate, even when the pain they are experiencing is causing no
physical harm. It’s the same with perceived effort, and this is why in open-
--- PAGE 45 ---
loop fitness tests, even the toughest runners step off the treadmill before
they physically have to.
Psychological limits are admittedly kind of smudgy compared to physical
limits. When there’s more at stake, pain tolerance goes up. Similarly, when
(in psychobiological terms) the potential motivation level is higher,
perceived effort tolerance goes up. This has been shown in a variety of
studies, including a 2012 experiment by British exercise scientists Alexis
Mauger and Nick Sculthorpe in which subjects completed a pair of
VO2max tests, one of which was a standard open loop, where runners kept
running faster and faster in incremental steps to failure, and the other of
which was a novel closed-loop test, which was fixed at 10 minutes in
length. As you will recall from earlier in the chapter, VO2max is supposed
to be a hard physiological limit, and yet the subjects of this experiment
were able to achieve 8 percent higher VO2max scores in the closed-loop test
than they did in the open-loop test.
How come? Mauger and Sculthorpe speculated that the subjects were
simply more motivated in the closed loop; hence they dug deeper—and I
think they’re right. Remember, according to Brehm’s motivational intensity
theory, people tend to disengage from tasks either when they’ve completed
them successfully or when they feel that continuing is not worth the effort.
In an open-loop run, there’s really no such thing as successful task
completion; the only thing you get for continuing to run is greater suffering.
But in a 10-minute VO2max test, you know you’re done after 10 minutes no
matter what, so it’s easy to motivate yourself to give it all you’ve got.
What’s important to note here is that the subjects in this study felt they
were working as hard as they could in both tests, even though they were
objectively working harder in the closed loop. It is in this sense that
maximal perceived effort tolerance represents a real limit that cannot be
exceeded in any circumstances, but it’s a mutable limit that may align with
different physiological measurements in different circumstances, depending
on how they affect potential motivation.
In the years since Marcora introduced the psychobiological model of
exercise tolerance, he and other scientists have gathered plenty of evidence
in support of the idea that endurance races are indeed paced by perceived
effort. One example is a study led by Bruno Ferreira Viana of the University
of Rio de Janeiro, which was published in the journal Applied
--- PAGE 46 ---
Psychophysiology and Biofeedback in 2016. Nineteen cyclists completed a
stationary time trial that consisted of four laps of 9.9 (simulated) kilometers.
Upon completing each lap, the cyclists reported their current rate of
perceived exertion (RPE) on a 1–100 scale. Viana’s team found that, across
all subjects, perceived effort ratings increased linearly and peaked at 100
points at the end of the time trial. This pattern was so consistent that anyone
with sufficient math skills who was told nothing about the time trial except
what the subjects’ perceived effort ratings were after the first two laps
would have been able to accurately predict the total distance of the time
trial.
Further evidence that perceived effort runs the show in pacing comes
from studies involving the use of deceptive performance feedback during
time trials. In one such study, experienced cyclists completed four
simulated 10-mile time trials, receiving accurate performance feedback on
one occasion, no feedback on a second, and inaccurate feedback (either 5
percent better or 5 percent worse than actual) on the other two. Despite
these disparate informational environments, the cyclists completed all four
time trials in about the same time, indicating that they relied on perceived
effort rather than objective information to determine how fast they could
really go.
In our age of technological hyperdependency, we are quick to assume
that our devices are more reliable than our perceptions. The thing to
understand about endurance performance is that perceptions don’t just
indicate our limits; they are our limits. When you feel you can’t run any
harder, you can’t, and when you feel you can, you can—no matter what the
numbers say.
Imagine telling a friend that you feel cold, only to hear your friend say,
“No, you’re not. It’s 80 degrees.” You’d probably look at them like they
were crazy, and you’d be right to do so, because to feel cold is to be cold,
regardless of the actual environmental temperature. It’s the same with
perception of effort. This perception decides how fast you can go, and no
objective metric can be more “right” than this subjective feeling.
Redefining the Perfect Race
--- PAGE 47 ---
In Chapter 1, we defined the perfect race as one in which the runner
maintains a consistent work rate from beginning to end and is able to speed
up only slightly on the homestretch despite their best efforts to wow
spectators with a scorching sprint to the line. We are now in a position to
add some color to this definition.
Figure 2.1 is based on a study conducted by South African researchers
and published in the British Journal of Sports Medicine in 2009. Trained
cyclists were given the unenviable task of completing four separate time
trials ranging in distance from 5 km to 100 km. At regular intervals, the
cyclists were asked to rate their perceived exertion on a scale of 1 to 10. As
you can see, the initial RPE was lower for the longer time trials, reflective
of the lower work rate that was chosen out of respect for the distance to be
completed, but in all four trials, RPE increased linearly and converged at
the finish.
Figure 2.1. Rate of perceived exertion in time trials of various distances
Whether or not these time trials were perfectly paced is beside the point.
What’s certain is that the RPE graph of a time trial or race that was paced
perfectly would look a lot like this one. Why? Well, we know that a steady
--- PAGE 48 ---
work rate is required to minimize completion time. We also know that RPE
increases linearly over time when a steady work rate is sustained. And we
know that an athlete cannot exercise beyond their maximal RPE, so they’d
darn well better be within sight of the finish when they reach this limit!
In fact, we can be more precise. There’s evidence that humans cannot
tolerate the discomfort of a maximal perceived effort—the feeling of trying
as hard as we possibly can—longer than about 30 seconds. Some of this
evidence comes from a cleverly designed study appearing in the British
Journal of Sports Medicine in 2011. Nine male subjects were asked to
complete stationary bike sprints of 5, 10, 15, 30, and 45 seconds. Power
data revealed that, despite being instructed to pedal as hard as they could in
all five sprints, the subjects held back a little in the 30- and 45-second
sprints. The simplest explanation for their noncompliance is that they knew
from past experience that they could not tolerate the discomfort of a
maximal effort lasting so long, and they therefore paced themselves in the
longer sprints without even consciously realizing it.
What these findings suggest is that runners must be within about 30
seconds of the finish line when their perceived effort hits maximum or else
they’ll need to slow down to keep from exceeding their tolerance. But
there’s a second reason that runners ought to pace themselves in this way.
The graph in figure 2.2 shows the results of a typical 30-second stationary
bike sprint. As you can see, even at a true maximal effort, power declines
significantly from start to finish. In a 45-second sprint, power would decline
further, and in a 60-second sprint, it would fall further still. This precipitous
drop has nothing to do with perceived effort but instead reflects physical
limits to the sustainability of extreme exercise intensities.
--- PAGE 49 ---
Figure 2.2. Power output in a 30-second cycling time trial
As the sprints keep getting longer, there comes a point where pedaling
all-out from the start no longer produces the best performance. In trained
athletes, this point comes somewhere between (you guessed it) 30 and 45
seconds. This is why sprinters run all-out from the start of a 200-meter race
(which takes around 20 seconds for elite athletes to complete), whereas they
hold back a little at the start of a 400-meter race (which takes 45–50
seconds to complete). Putting aside the issue of perceived effort tolerance, a
runner who started a 400-meter sprint at maximal effort would—for entirely
physiological reasons—slow down so much before the end that they would
finish behind an identical clone who paced themselves.
Long-distance races are always paced, of course. But as we’ve noted, a
runner’s maximal sprint pace decreases with fatigue. If you want to beat
Sha’Carri Richardson in a 100-meter sprint, make her run 20 miles first!
Her power will be sufficiently reduced by this prior effort that you just
might stand a chance of nipping her at the tape. The fact that maximal work
rate decreases over the course of a longer race helps explain why perceived
effort increases linearly at any given pace. As fatigue builds, we not only
move closer to the limit of how far we can go but also move closer to the
(decreasing) limit of how fast we can go, and we feel this.
--- PAGE 50 ---
It’s fascinating to see what happens when a runner tries to defy these
realities in a race. An example is Sifan Hassan’s performance in the 2023
IAAF World Outdoor Championships 10,000 meters. With 250 meters
remaining in the last of 25 laps, Hassan burst into the lead. Only Gudaf
Tsegay was able to hitch a ride in the Dutch runner’s slipstream. As the two
women rounded the final bend, Tsegay pulled even with Hassan and raced
her shoulder to shoulder down the final straightaway. So closely were the
rivals pressed together that Hassan accidentally elbowed Tsegay in the
chest, not once but twice.
But that’s not why Hassan fell. Track and field fans who don’t understand
the science of human endurance limits studied the replay over and over,
looking for a toe stub or contact between Hassan’s and Tsegay’s feet, but
there was none. Fifty meters from the finish, Hassan simply pitched forward
and hit the deck.
The popular term for the phenomenon that caused Hassan to lose the race
is “tying up.” Studies involving measurements of entropy (or disorder) in
the running stride shed light on what happens when a runner ties up. When
applied to motor skills like running, entropy indicates how much variation,
or “play,” there is in an athlete’s movements. Researchers have learned that
entropy tends to be higher in well-trained runners and when runners are not
fatigued, indicating in both instances that they are far from their limit and
able to move freely. But when an athlete nears the point of exhaustion,
entropy suddenly drops, and their movements become rigid and robotic.
The term “tying up” came into use long before it was technically feasible to
measure stride entropy, but it perfectly captures what is happening.
In most cases, entropy drop is not visible to the naked eye, but in the
most extreme cases, it is. Interestingly, these cases almost always occur in
world-class runners who attempt to sustain a protracted sprint at the end of
a 5000- or 10,000-meter track race with a medal on the line. We saw it
happen to Sifan Hassan in the 2023 World Athletics Championships 10,000
meters, and it happened previously to Steve Prefontaine in the 1972
Olympic 5000 meters, where the replay shows the American suddenly
jolting and hinging forward on the final straight as though shot from behind
by an unseen sniper, coming almost to a dead stop some 10 meters from the
line and losing his bronze-medal position to Ian Stewart of Great Britain.
--- PAGE 51 ---
It’s not known exactly what’s happening physiologically when a runner
ties up this badly. We know that entropy drop causes the tie-up, but what
causes the entropy drop? It’s a difficult question to answer, for it is virtually
impossible to exercise a runner to the point of true physiological failure—
the kind we saw in Hassan at Budapest—in a laboratory environment. As
I’ve suggested, the phenomenon occurs only when extremely fit, supremely
motivated, and extraordinarily tough runners try to sprint for longer than 30
seconds on tired legs, which tells me that these conditions are absolute
requirements for a catastrophic tie-up. But judging by appearances, I
suspect it is triggered by some kind of self-protective interruption in the
transmission of motor signals from the brain to the muscles, not unlike a
power surge tripping a circuit breaker.1 Few runners appreciate the
importance of timing in stride mechanics. Runners would fall all the time if
not for an exquisitely synchronized choreography of muscle contractions
and relaxations that keep them upright and moving forward. One small
interruption throws a spanner in the works that brings the whole system
crashing down.
Have you ever seen a professional juggler screw up? If you have, then
you know they never drop just one plate but always all 10. Tying up is like
that. When the timing is lost, everything is lost.
It’s likely that Sifan Hassan would have lost her duel with Gudaf Tsegay
even if she hadn’t fallen. But she’d still have taken silver. Instead she
peeled herself off the track and trotted dazedly across the line in 11th place.
It’s brutal to say so yet true nonetheless that Hassan ran a less-than-perfect
race in Paris. It takes a very special athlete, however, to commit the
particular pacing error she did—special enough that, more often than not,
they’ll get it right, as Hassan did just 6 weeks later at the Chicago
Marathon, where she came from behind to win with the second-fastest
women’s marathon time ever (2:13:44). Nevertheless, her collapse in
Budapest puts the final touch on our definition of a perfect race. Simply put,
had Hassan fallen 50 meters later, she’d have run the perfect race.
Another brutally honest true statement is that, unlike Hassan, the vast
majority of runners truly suck at pacing. Let’s find out why and what can be
done about it.
1 The elusive central governor? Not quite. Brain-centered mechanisms are known to cause
involuntary muscle failure in certain special circumstances. The best examples are hyperthermia
--- PAGE 52 ---
and exercise-induced muscle cramping. Tying up, I propose, is one more. This is different from
Noakes’s theory, which proposes that brain-centered mechanisms enforce performance limits in
all circumstances.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 53 ---
3
Why You Suck at Pacing
In 2016, Scottish anthropologist Michael Crawley relocated to Ethiopia for
15 months to study the country’s elite running culture. A talented runner
himself, Crawley did most of his fieldwork literally on the run, trying and
very often failing to keep up with his subjects. But even when he couldn’t
keep up, things had a way of working out.
One day Crawley was running alone on a gravel road east of Addis
Ababa, having once again lost contact with his training partners, when he
was caught from behind by a stranger in Adidas racing flats who, instead of
overtaking Crawley, offered to run with him. The Scotsman demurred,
citing the need to take it easy, but the stranger was having none of it and
pressed Crawley to name his preferred pace, promising that whatever it
was, he would make it happen.
“Four minutes per kilometer,” Crawley conceded.
“Perfect,” said the stranger, who was not wearing a watch.
“No GPS?” Crawley asked, dubious.
“It is in here,” the stranger said, pointing to his temple.
Sure enough, the next kilometer was completed in 4 minutes flat. It was
then that Crawley learned his companion was formerly a professional race
“rabbit” who had twice paced his countryman Haile Gebrselassie to
marathon world records in Berlin.
If every runner were capable of banging out a precise 4-minute kilometer
on command, Crawley wouldn’t have considered this story worth telling. In
fact, though, few runners possess the pacing chops to replicate the show put
on by Gebrselassie’s former wingman, which Crawley duly recounted in
Out of Thin Air: Running Wisdom and Magic from Above the Clouds in
Ethiopia. After reading the book, I experienced a kind of counterpoint to
Crawley’s encounter that served as further evidence that pacing masters are
the exception, not the rule. It happened during a virtual running camp
--- PAGE 54 ---
hosted by my friend Greg McMillan. On day 2 of the 3-day affair, the
campers completed a challenge that required them to run a mile at their
individual lactate threshold pace without consulting their watch. Afterward
we gathered online to share the results, and they weren’t pretty. One runner
was off the mark by 40 seconds, while another confessed to peeking at her
watch halfway through the challenge, powerless to resist the force of habit.
Even the winner was off by several seconds.
All fun and games, though, right? Wrong. The pacing feat that Michael
Crawley witnessed on a gravel road east of Addis Ababa wasn’t just some
frivolous party trick. Nor was the inability of Greg McMillan’s campers to
judge their pace accurately a matter of inconsequence for their training and
racing. To the contrary, a runner who is able to run an exact 4-minute
kilometer upon request is a runner who is also capable of executing better
workouts and realizing their full potential in races.
Good pacing is all about accuracy. To find your absolute limit in a race
without exceeding it is to score a bull’s-eye of sorts. It is only to be
expected that the runners who succeed most fully in this effort are also, like
Michael Crawley’s pacing angel, really darn good at measuring things by
feel when they run. But pacing skill is difficult to appreciate. When a
professional soccer player boots a free kick over the heads of opponents
arrayed in a defensive wall, past the outstretched hands of a diving
goalkeeper, and into the upper right corner of the net from 30 yards away,
we say, “Wow,” amazed by the precision with which the player is able to
control their body in space. A perfectly executed race is rather dull by
comparison, yet pacing is no less a matter of controlling the body in space
than kicking a soccer ball, and precision in this skill is no less impressive to
those who understand its underlying similarity to other sports skills. Feats
like Crawley’s companion’s 4-minute kilometer hint at how good the best
pacers really are—not only when showing off for visiting ethnographers but
also in real competition.
I’m not suggesting you have to achieve uncanny exactitude in measuring
your runs by feel to find your limit in races. I’m just trying to establish how
far away most of us are from pacing mastery. For every retired race rabbit
dropping 4-minute kilometers on command, there are two dozen McMillan
Running Camp participants missing their 1-mile time target by 40 seconds,
give or take. To put it bluntly, the majority of runners suck at pacing. Odds
--- PAGE 55 ---
are, you suck at pacing. (Or did you pick up this book accidentally?) As to
why pacing mastery is so rare, I see three main reasons, none of them
insurmountable.
Reason #1: Pacing Is Hard!
Snowboarders who lack the ability to execute a triple cork don’t beat
themselves up for it. Why not? Because it’s one of the most difficult
snowboard tricks ever invented, and only a handful of boarders on earth can
pull it off. Watch a few clips of triple corks on YouTube, and you will see
how hard it looks. Pacing, on the other hand, doesn’t look hard at all.
As they say, however, looks can be deceiving. A marathon, for example,
is a race of roughly 55,000 steps. Completing a marathon in the least time
possible requires that a runner execute every single one of those steps at a
speed that contributes to this goal. The precision involved in optimal
marathon pacing is about equal to that of the 2021 landing of NASA’s
automobile-sized Perseverance spacecraft on a 20-square-mile target
located inside a crater on the planet Mars, some 250 million miles from
Earth. Except NASA’s engineers had mathematics and physics to go by,
whereas runners must literally feel their way to this level of preciseness.
Neuroscientist Vincent Walsh of the Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience
has argued that piloting the body through an endurance race is among the
most difficult tasks the brain can perform, subjecting our most vital organ to
the simultaneous demands of driving maximal levels of motor output,
managing crisis-level discomfort, and handling the immense cognitive and
perceptual challenge that pacing presents. We tend to think of sophisticated
mental operations such as landing a spacecraft on Mars as requiring more
brainpower than athletic challenges like running 50K trail running events.
But in fact the opposite is true, because an endurance race entails both
mental work and physical work, and physical work is mental work. As
science fiction writer Ted Chiang wrote in the novella “Understand,” “It is a
misconception to think that during evolution humans sacrificed physical
skill in exchange for intelligence: wielding one’s body is a mental activity.”
It is a proven fact that cognitively demanding tasks, such as taking a
math test, result in high levels of brain fatigue. Know what else is
cognitively demanding? Pacing a running race.
--- PAGE 56 ---
Science has also demonstrated that sustained efforts of emotional
regulation—things like trying to stay calm in stressful situations—produce
high levels of brain fatigue. If you have ever done a running race, you can
attest that chasing your limit is also a sustained effort to regulate emotion.
Research has shown as well that exhaustive physical work produces high
levels of brain fatigue. Would you agree that “exhaustive physical exercise”
is a good description of a running race? Thought so.
Finding your limit in a running race is like taking a math test, trying to
keep calm in a stressful situation, and working to exhaustion all at the same
time, taxing the soggy, electrified, 3-pound organ that makes us who we are
more severely than just about anything we experience in our everyday lives.
That’s hard!
Reason #2: Experience Matters
Around the same time Michael Crawley was being paced through a long
run in Ethiopia by a former professional race rabbit, I was trying less
successfully to pace my nephew Caleb through the High Street Hustle 1K
Kids Run in Salem, Oregon. My brother Josh had asked me to run with his
6-year-old while he accompanied Caleb’s younger brother, Luca. Minutes
before the start, I gave my young charge a brief strategy talk.
“Don’t go out too fast,” I cautioned. “All the other kids are going to take
off at full speed and blow up. If you start a little slower, you’ll pass them up
at the end. Got it?”
The hint of impatience I picked up from Caleb’s shrugging promise to
heed my advice struck me as slightly ominous. Sure enough, when the horn
blared, my nephew took off at a dead sprint, right along with everyone else.
The fastest kid in his soccer league, Caleb shot ahead at a velocity that
demanded a real effort on my part to match. Recognizing that, at this point,
experience would probably be his best teacher, I kept a half step behind him
as he pursued the leader, an 8-year-old dressed in a super cool lime-green
racing kit with jagged black stripes.
Caleb’s chickens came home to roost at the traffic cone marking the
halfway point. His breathing became audible, his pace slowed, and he
looked up at me two or three times with an uncertain expression. This could
get ugly, I thought. And it did. Caleb’s wheezing intensified to the point I
--- PAGE 57 ---
feared he might have an asthma attack (even though he doesn’t have
asthma). He put up a brave fight, I must say, mustering two or three
kamikaze surges before crossing the line second in a very respectable time
of 4:42.
If you’re smiling right now, it’s because you’ve seen children, either
yours or someone else’s, endure the same ordeal—or because Caleb
reminds you of yourself in your first race. Poor pacing, particularly the
pacing error of starting too fast, is the signature first-time endurance racer’s
error, an almost universal rite of passage.
No human is born a pacing master. Sure, some runners have a greater
knack for pacing than others do, but even the most naturally skilled pacers
require plenty of practice to achieve true mastery. Through repetition,
runners get better at comprehending abstract distances, develop a subtler
sense of time, become more skilled at reading their perceptions, learn more
effective ways of tuning their attentional focus, and gain a better feel for
their physical and mental limits—all of which contribute to more effective
pacing.
Research suggests that the last of these elements comes first—that new
runners often develop a better feel for their limits before they get better at
the cognitive elements of pacing. This was shown in a study performed by
Australian researchers and published in Pediatric Exercise Science in 2013.
Thirteen children between the ages of 9 and 11 were asked to run an 800-
meter time trial on three separate occasions. Because this was a novel task
for the children, it was expected that their performance would improve
across the three time trials through refinements in their pacing execution.
And improve they did—but not through better pacing. Rather, in all three
time trials, the children started too fast, slowed down significantly, and then
sped up again toward the end. The true reason for their improved
performance was simply that they tried harder. The 800-meter race distance
is notoriously painful. Having never before experienced this particular
flavor of suffering, the children were undoubtedly alarmed by the
sensations they felt in the first time trial and thus regulated their pace in a
way that kept their discomfort from becoming intolerable. But there was
nothing solid or impenetrable about this self-imposed limit. In the second
time trial, therefore, understanding at least tacitly that they could run a little
faster if they were willing to suffer a little more by trying a little harder,
--- PAGE 58 ---
they did. The new limit thus established was no less a matter of choice than
the first, however, so in the final time trial, the kids ran faster still at the cost
of even greater discomfort.
Other studies indicate that athletes continue to home in on their true limit
through subsequent stages of athletic development. In Chapter 2, I
described research showing that experienced runners exhibit a higher
degree of entropy, or “play,” in their stride than novice runners but that
entropy decreases in all runners, experienced and novice alike, when they
near exhaustion. This measurable “tying up” of the running stride indicates
that a runner’s movements have become highly constrained by proximity to
one or more physiological limits. What’s most interesting about this
research is that, although experienced runners start off with more stride
entropy, they typically achieve lower entropy levels and persist longer at
minimum entropy in exhaustive running tests, evidence that these runners
are able to get closer than less experienced runners to their physiological
limits. All runners feel they’re at their limit when they quit such tests, but
the entropy research tells us this feeling has greater correspondence to
objective reality in expert runners.
Mastering the skill of pacing requires not only that you have a good feel
for your limits but also that you can measure a mile or a minute accurately
without a GPS or a chronometer. In other words, it requires that your
perceptions of time and distance be well calibrated to reality, for the goal in
racing is to find your limit not in any abstract way but within specific time
and distance parameters (e.g., running 13.1 miles faster than ever before).
Evidence that experienced runners benefit from well-calibrated internal
chronometers can be found in a study conducted by Spanish and Chilean
researchers and published in Motor Control in 2020. Thirty-eight endurance
runners and 39 soccer players were asked to estimate elapsed time (i.e., how
long they’d been going) during a bout of sustained running. Among the
runners, who of course were accustomed to sustained running, the average
error margin was 33 seconds, whereas the soccer players, who, although
plenty accustomed to running, were not accustomed to sustained running,
missed the mark by more than 2 minutes on average, validating the authors’
hypothesis that “temporal and spatial perception can be considered as a
cognitive skill of endurance runners.”
--- PAGE 59 ---
An even subtler aspect of pacing skill has to do with what runners (and
other endurance athletes) pay attention to when racing. Pacing masters
know when to tune in and when to tune out during competition—others not
so much. Proof comes from a study led by Manhal Boya of the University
of Essex and published in Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise in
2017. In this experiment, eye movements were tracked in a mixed group of
novice and experienced cyclists while they completed a 10-mile time trial
with access to visual feedback on speed, distance, power output, heart rate,
cadence, and time. The results revealed a strong association between
performance in the time trial and where the cyclists’ eyes went while doing
it. The faster-finishing experienced cyclists focused mainly on their speed
(“How am I performing?”) and paid little attention to any other metric
besides distance, while the novices scattered their attention more broadly,
with distance (“How long until I can stop?”) getting the bulk of their eye
time. The conclusion that Boya’s team drew from these findings was
straightforward: “Experienced cyclists are more selective and consistent in
attention to feedback during [time trial] cycling.”
Relax. You don’t need to figure out how to be more “selective and
consistent” in your “attention to feedback” during running. The whole idea
is that all of these things—becoming more selective and consistent in
attending to feedback; getting better at measuring time, distance, and speed
with your brain; and improving your ability to perceive how hard you’re
working in relation to your limit—happen naturally as the miles pile up.
You don’t have to make these changes happen; you just need to let them
happen by continuing to run. This is not to suggest you can’t accelerate
pacing skill development through various active measures; you can, and I
will describe some of these measures in later chapters. It is only to say that,
for the most part, the process is unconscious, requiring no less and no more
than that you keep running.
Consider the marathon, a famously difficult pacing challenge. The vast
majority of participants in any given marathon hit the wall, slowing down
dramatically in the last few miles. But not all categories of runners are
equally prone to bonking in marathons. In 2017, Swiss exercise
physiologist Beat Knechtle teamed up with Pantelis Nikolaidis of the
Exercise Physiology Laboratory in Attica, Greece, to analyze pace data
from more than 300,000 participants in the New York City Marathon
between 2006 and 2016. Among their key findings was that older runners
--- PAGE 60 ---
paced themselves more evenly and slowed down less than younger runners
with equal finish times, an indication that they had learned through
experience how to avoid a late-race fade.
If you’ve ever doubted your ability to become a pacing master, take heart
from the example of Laura, a masters runner I met through Facebook.
Laura’s first six marathons ended in major bonking episodes. When she
signed up for marathon number seven—the 2018 Rehoboth Seashore
Marathon—she was resolved to break the pattern. More than just resolved,
though, Laura was ready. Her failure to maintain a steady pace in those first
six marathons had given her the experience she needed to know how fast
was too fast for her in a race of this distance and also how she should feel at
different points of a marathon if she was to avoid having to slow down near
the end. “I was determined to break 5 hours,” she told me afterward via
Facebook. “I took it on very deliberately. I wore a pace bracelet for a 4:55
finish. I stuck to the pace for the first 13 miles. My plan was to check in at
miles 13, 16, 20, and 23. If I felt good, I would pick it up a notch. At each
juncture, I felt great. By mile 16, I was passing people at regular intervals.
At 23, I still felt good. I decided there was no way I would allow myself to
finish feeling good, so I started to run hard enough to feel the pain.” Having
reached the halfway mark in 2:22:56, Laura negative-split the second half
and crossed the finish line in 4:42:47, a newly minted pacing master.
One thing about experiential learning is that it is aided by an early start,
which in running is becoming less and less the norm. Among the several
reasons runners aren’t as good at pacing today as they were when my dad
was doing marathons is that they’re taking up the sport later in life. The
typical marathoner during the first running boom was someone who ran
competitively in high school and kept going, but nowadays runners like
Laura—who ran on and off in her late twenties and thirties but only got
serious in her forties—are far more typical. Still, examples like hers prove
that any runner is capable of using experience to pace themselves ever more
skillfully.
Reason #3: Device Dependency
In July 2020, fitness device manufacturer Garmin fell victim to a
ransomware attack that completely shut down the company’s online
--- PAGE 61 ---
services for several days. Runners and other athletes who relied on these
services for uploading and downloading workout data had to make do
without them during this period. A disconcertingly large number of the
affected athletes responded to the disruption by completely freaking out,
many publicly. A Garmin user myself, I did not freak out, but I did
appreciate the panic I observed on social media as a reminder of how
dependent runners have become on their fitness devices.
Not that I needed reminding. As a coach, I see daily evidence of the
stymieing effect sports watches are having on pacing skill development.
Here are a few examples of device overdependence I’ve collected from
athletes I’ve worked with. Not all of them are specific to pacing, but each is
representative of a general relationship between athlete and device that
holds the athlete back from achieving pacing mastery.
Example 1: Anything for the Score
Icy roads forced Sergio to go slower than normal in the run he’d
downloaded to his device from an 80/20 training plan. As he neared the end
of the run, Sergio glanced at his watch and discovered that, because of the
slow pace, he was not going to achieve the predicted Training Stress Score
(TSS, a proprietary metric that factors together workout intensity and
duration). To avoid this perceived failure, Sergio extended the run by
several minutes, stopping only when the forecasted TSS had been reached,
believing that in so doing, he had salvaged the original intention of the run.
The problem with this logic was that it assumed Sergio’s slower-than-
normal pace indicated a lower-than-normal intensity when in fact the extra
muscle work needed to remain upright made the effort harder, as he could
plainly feel. By extending the run, Sergio made it harder still—all because
he trusted an esoteric mathematical projection more than he trusted his own
perceptions or common sense.
Example 2: Slave to the Segment
Ryan, a mountain runner I coached for a couple of years, ran the first part of
a long, uphill tempo effort much faster than he was supposed to, and he
soon paid the price, practically crawling to the summit. When I asked him
during our next weekly call what the hell had gotten into him, Ryan
admitted that the first part of the climb was a Strava segment he wanted to
--- PAGE 62 ---
capture. “Forgive me,” I said, my voice dripping with sarcasm, “I didn’t
realize Strava was coaching you now.”
Example 3: Data or It Didn’t Happen
While vacationing in the Napa Valley with my wife one summer, I received
an unexpected call from Bob, a triathlete I coached. The few such calls I’d
gotten from Bob previously had brought bad news, so I was braced for
another injury report when I answered. I needn’t have worried. Evidently,
Bob’s power meter had died at the beginning of a bike ride, and he was now
standing at the side of the road, wondering if he should go ahead and
complete the workout sans data or push it back a day and try to get the
device fixed in the meantime. Hearing this, I couldn’t decide whether to
laugh or cry. In what possible universe could a dead power meter be
considered a reason to miss a workout?
Example 4: Virtual Reality Takes Over
Amir completed a set of speed intervals on his indoor bike. Minutes later,
my phone notified me that the workout had been uploaded. When I
analyzed the data, I saw a massive spike in power at the start of each
interval before Amir settled back into the correct wattage zone. Knowing
the answer, I asked Amir what was behind those crazy spikes. Can you
guess? Bingo! Noticing a lag between the time he started each interval and
the time his bike’s power meter caught up with the change in output, Amir
had pedaled like mad in the first few seconds in a desperate effort to
produce the desired number, then slowed down on discovering he’d
overshot the target—not once but 12 times in a row. Amir’s a smart guy. On
some level, he knew his power meter was lying to him, giving him
yesterday’s news, so to speak. Yet he acted as though he believed the
number on the computer was more real than what his body was doing.
Example 5: My Heart Rate Monitor Says I’m Dying!
Kevin posted a concern about his recent training on an online forum that I
moderate. Lately, he explained, his heart rate had been a little higher than
normal in relation to his pace, and the VO2max estimates his watch fed him
after each run had dipped slightly. A newer runner, Kevin was becoming
--- PAGE 63 ---
discouraged and beginning to doubt the effectiveness of the 80/20 method
he was following. Having seen this movie before, I asked him how he
actually felt while running and whether he would notice anything different
if he ran without his watch. “Now that you ask,” he replied, “I think I feel
fine while running, maybe even good, but when my pace is right and my
heart rate seems high, I feel down about it and frustrated during my run and
also after.” It was just as I had suspected: Kevin’s supposed crisis of fitness
was in fact a matter of perception, an emotional panic triggered by
information that had various possible explanations, all of them more
plausible than the one Kevin had assumed in defiance of how he was
actually feeling and performing.
Example 6: Happy After the Fact
Suzanne was crestfallen at the end of her tempo run, having fallen short of
the pace targets I’d given her. But later, when she reviewed her power data,
Suzanne saw that, according to this other metric, she’d actually performed
better than her device’s estimation of her current fitness level. Windy
conditions, I concluded, were the cause of the discrepancy between
Suzanne’s pace and power numbers. In any case, she was no longer
disappointed. Mind you, nothing had changed about the run itself.
I could give you many more examples, but I trust I’ve made my point,
which is that device overdependence is extremely pervasive among runners
and manifests in myriad ways. Despite superficial differences, these several
examples have one thing in common, which is a certain tension between
what the runner’s body and mind are saying and what the runner’s device is
saying. In matters of pacing, this tension takes the form of a disagreement
between what feels right to the runner and the runner’s interpretation of
device data. Each such disagreement must be resolved one way or the other.
It’s a matter of who gets the final say, the runner or the device. Runners
who are comfortable overruling their devices are not overdependent and
have a clear runway toward pacing mastery. Runners who are not
comfortable overruling their device are overdependent and must gain the
upper hand in their relationship with their device to become a pacing
master.
Running devices aren’t bad. They just aren’t as capable of guiding
runners to their limit as runners themselves are. That’s because (as I
--- PAGE 64 ---
mentioned in the preceding chapter) a runner’s performance limit is not
determined by anything a wearable device can measure. It is determined by
subjective perceptions. If a runner lacks sufficient confidence in their feel
for pacing and can’t grant it the deciding vote in all pacing decisions,
pacing mastery will elude the runner, at least for now.
Figure 3.1. Device overdependence
Mark Remy ©2021 / www.dumbrunner.com
--- PAGE 65 ---
It doesn’t stop there, however. Running devices also rob runners of
existing pacing ability through a phenomenon called cognitive offloading.
Technologies such as running devices become extensions of the brain. We
use them to offload cognitive tasks from our brains to external gadgets. The
problem is that when the brain stops performing a certain task that has been
assumed by a gadget, the brain gets lazy and loses the ability to perform the
task for itself. For example, research has shown that habitual reliance on
GPS technology for navigation causes spatial memory to deteriorate and
leads to measurable atrophy in the hippocampus, a part of the brain that’s
heavily involved in helping us find our way around. Running devices do
something similar with respect to pacing skill. The more we lean on them in
our pacing decisions, the worse we get at reading our perception of effort;
measuring time, distance, and velocity by feel; and knowing our limit.
Too big to ignore, the problem of device overdependence has gotten the
attention of scientists. In 2020, the journal Psychology published a study led
by Pierluigi Diotaiuti of the University of Cassino and Southern Lazio in
Italy. A group of 111 runners supplied information about their use of “sports
trackers” and completed a questionnaire designed to assess device
dependency, which was scored on the basis of how subjects answered
questions such as, “If you could not have your device with you, would you
still train?” The results indicated that most runners start off relying too
much on their devices. While some worked their way past their
overdependence, others didn’t.
In particular, runners who managed to escape device dependency tended
to pass through clear stages in their use of sports trackers. The first stage
was one of exploration and discovery—learning what their device could do,
essentially. From there, runners moved into a consolidation phase,
characterized by a more focused and purposeful use of key features. Then
came the paring phase, marked by a rigorous selection of features that left
runners attending only to data they deemed essential to goal achievement.
The authors concluded that “more experienced runners . . . have shown that
over time they have acquired a progressive mastery and internal control of
their performance functions,” and they were able to use “the sport trackers
in a strictly instrumental way, for which there was no perception of
dependence or submission.”
--- PAGE 66 ---
Like I said, it’s all about who has the final say, the runner or the watch.
Runners who aren’t comfortable overruling their device lack agency in their
training, whereas those who get to the point where they trust themselves
more than their watch gain a firm hand on the tiller of their running
experience. Although this study did not look at specific consequences of
device overdependence, I would bet my life savings that, as a group, the
runners in this study who were least dependent were the best pacers.
A second noteworthy study on training device usage by runners was
performed by scientists at the University of Twente and published in the
journal Sensors in 2021. Through a combination of interviews and diaries,
22 competitive recreational runners provided detailed information about
how and why they used their training devices. A number of these runners
had interesting things to say about the tension they experienced between
their own opinions and those of their device concerning pacing matters.
Their natural inclination was to turn over control to their device and run on
autopilot, as it were. But what they discovered was that their gadgets
weren’t all that trustworthy in the area of pacing. To the extent they had
offloaded pacing responsibility to their devices, however, the runners didn’t
trust themselves either, leaving them in an untenable, rudderless state. Some
resolved the dilemma by tuning out their device data altogether.
“I feel horrible when seeing that I am not keeping up with a pace that I
planned,” one runner said, “so I start thinking if I should push myself harder
on the next kilometer or punish myself by running slow. . . . I just avoid
looking at it at all and check once I’m done because it influences me in the
wrong way. . . . It’s just not that helpful, is it?” You couldn’t ask for a better
description of what it feels like when you just can’t figure out how to
transform running devices from a crutch, which is what they start off as for
most runners, into the tool they must become for pacing mastery to be
achieved.
Experience alone does not guarantee that a runner will eventually get to
the point where they trust themselves more than their device. Not all of the
experienced runners included in the Pierluigi Diotaiuti study described
earlier escaped device overdependence. For that matter, most of the
examples of device overdependence I shared above involved experienced
athletes. Why do some runners escape device overdependence and master
pacing while others struggle? What do they have that the rest lack?
--- PAGE 67 ---
In a word, self-regulation. A hot topic in the fields of sports psychology
and general psychology, self-regulation is a general capacity, shared by all
living organisms, to manage their internal states and behaviors according to
the demands of a situation, and it is critical to pacing skill. As we will see in
the next chapter, runners must either have or acquire a strong capacity to
self-regulate to learn from experience and overcome device
overdependence and the inherent difficulty of pacing to find their limit and
run with confidence and control.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 68 ---
4
Pacing as Self-Regulation
Humans are not the only organisms that pace themselves during physical
activity. Animals of all kinds depend for their survival on the ability to
distribute their energy efficiently when engaging in life-or-death acts like
hunting, escape, and migration. Take cheetahs, for example. Zoologists
have observed that wild cheetahs run significantly farther in hunts that end
in a successful kill than in hunts that don’t. This suggests cheetahs are able
to accurately judge whether they are likely to catch their prey, and when
they deem success unlikely, they give up the chase in order to avoid wasting
energy. Interestingly, the longest unsuccessful chases are usually carried out
by young cheetahs, an indication that they do not yet know their limits as
well as the more seasoned hunters do.
From a scientific perspective, pacing is classified as a form of self-
regulation, defined by the editors of the Handbook of Biobehavioral
Approaches to Self-Regulation as “a process that allows organisms to guide
their behavior in pursuit of their goals.” As such, self-regulation is
fundamentally predictive in nature. Goals lie in the future. Pursuing them
effectively therefore requires that the self-regulating organism be able to
anticipate the future with a certain degree of accuracy. This is as true for
human distance runners as it is for hunting cheetahs. In distance races, as
we’ve seen, runners continuously assess their effort level in relation to the
remaining distance and adjust their pace in the hope of crossing the finish
line just as they reach their perceived limit. The crucial difference between
this pacing task and a cheetah’s hunting behavior is that the former requires
the ability to comprehend abstract distances, which cheetahs lack. For better
or worse, only humans can hunt invisible prey such as “10 kilometers” or
“26.2 miles.”
That which is uniquely possible for our species isn’t necessarily easy for
us, however. Much as young cheetahs struggle to know when a hunt is
worth continuing and when to cut their losses, young and less experienced
--- PAGE 69 ---
runners struggle to find their limit during competition. To date, most of the
research tracking pacing skill development longitudinally has focused on
types of endurance athletes other than runners, but we can be confident the
findings apply to running. A 2015 study by British researchers found that
15-year-old competitive swimmers struggled to execute a basic pacing
challenge (7 × 200 meters at incrementally increasing speeds), a failure that
the authors attributed to both inexperience and cognitive immaturity. A
separate study by German scientists reported that 17-year-old competitive
swimmers performed much better in a comparable pacing challenge,
indicating that 2 years of additional experience and maturation go a long
way in adolescent swimmers aiming for pacing mastery.
Other research has shown that not all youth athletes improve equally in
pacing skill over time. In 2017, the International Journal of Sports
Physiology and Performance published the results of an ambitious 5-year
effort led by Rikstje Wiersma and colleagues at the University of Groningen
to track pacing skill development in a group of 104 youth speed skaters.
Based on their recent competitive performances, the skaters were ranked
initially as either elite, subelite, or nonelite. Interestingly, Wiersma’s team
found that, over the 5-year study period, skaters in all three categories
evolved pacing patterns that looked more and more like those of world-
class adult speed skaters, but the elite-level skaters showed significantly
more improvement in this area than those of lower rankings.
What to make of these findings? I think we can safely assume that, in
general, the young skaters who were classified as elite at the outset of the
study were more physically talented than their lower-ranked peers. But
what these results seem to suggest is that something else besides physical
talent—something that enabled these athletes to gain pacing skill more
quickly—was part of what made them elite in the first place.
In a 2017 article titled “Pacing and Self-Regulation: Important Skills for
Talent Development in Endurance Sports,” Marije Elferink-Gemser of the
University of Groningen and Florentina Hettinga of Northumbria
University offered the following answer to the question just posed:
It seems that athletes who exhibit the greatest response to training, i.e.,
those who are most successful in improving their performance over
time, are the ones who are eager to learn and train. They take
--- PAGE 70 ---
responsibility for their own learning and training process, know which
performance characteristics are important for them to develop, are
highly motivated to improve and take action to do so. This goal-driven
process is also described as self-regulation of learning and training,
consisting of components of metacognition, motivation, and behavior.
Self-regulation in general is the extent to which learners exert control
over their own learning and training to master a specific task and to
excel at it.
In other words, good learners make good pacers, and good self-regulators
make good learners. The question then becomes, Where does a strong
underlying capacity for self-regulation come from? If a runner needs to be
adept at self-regulation not only to pace well today but also to learn to pace
better tomorrow, what makes a runner (or any person) adept at self-
regulation?
Psychologists have identified a number of mental traits that contribute to
self-regulatory adeptness. Chief among them are body awareness,
judgment, and toughness. There are others, but these three have the greatest
relevance to the self-regulatory challenge of pacing a running event.
Without exception, pacing masters are runners who possess all three traits
to a high degree. Some are born with a head start and require little
experience to develop their innate gifts of body awareness, judgment, and
toughness to the level needed for pacing mastery. Others are less naturally
gifted in one or more of these areas and must bootstrap their way toward
having what it takes to become a pacing master.
In its dependence on fundamental mental traits, pacing is different from a
lot of other skills, like knitting, that are not rooted in self-regulation.
Whereas knitting ability is limited by manual dexterity and little else,
pacing goes much deeper, drawing upon core features of our psychology. If
you really want to become a pacing master, therefore, it might not be
enough for you to gather experience and practice pacing exercises. These
things are valuable, but so are the key mental aptitudes that support pacing
skill, and unless you already possess these traits at the level of a Kenenisa
Bekele, you stand to benefit from cultivating them.
Fear not—I haven’t forgotten that I am a running coach, not a life coach.
In this chapter and the next, I will focus narrowly on ways to cultivate body
--- PAGE 71 ---
awareness, judgment, and toughness within the domain of running. I’ll
leave it to you to decide how interested you are in growing more broadly in
these areas. Personally, I find it quite appealing that the journey toward
pacing mastery goes as deep as you want it to. I mean, what an opportunity!
Why merely improve as a runner when you can improve as a runner and
become a better version of yourself in the process?
Body Awareness
Can you feel your body right now? I’ll bet you can. Every organism with a
nervous system has the ability to feel its body in various ways. The
scientific term for this ability is interoception. To function effectively in the
world, we must not only feel our bodies but also know what we’re feeling
and act appropriately in response to what we feel. The hollow sensation we
get when our stomach is empty, for example, must be correctly interpreted
as a signal of hunger that prompts us to eat.
Beyond survival, interoception and related perceptions such as
proprioception (awareness of the body in space) are vital to mastering a
wide variety of skills. Body awareness in musicians is one example that has
received special attention from scientists. A study involving guitarists found
that years of practice had led to adaptations in the brain’s structure and
function that made the organ far more receptive to subtle nuances in
afferent feedback from the fingers. We all have brains and fingers, but
master guitarists have brains and fingers that can feel stuff ours can’t. It’s
the same with running. Through training, runners get better at using specific
forms of body awareness, including perception of effort, to aid their
running.
Psychology research has demonstrated a strong link between
interoceptive sensitivity (which is most often assessed by having subjects
estimate their pulse rate by feel) and overall self-regulatory ability (which is
measured through standardized inventories that ask subjects to rate their
level of agreement with statements like, “If I make a resolution to change
something, I pay a lot of attention to how I’m doing”). It makes sense, if
you think about it. Interoceptive sensitivity requires that the mind be good
at listening to the body, while self-regulation requires that the mind be good
at talking to the body. It is only to be expected that the better the mind gets
--- PAGE 72 ---
at listening to the body, the better it gets at telling it what to do, and vice
versa.
Pacing, of course, is deeply dependent on the mind’s ability to listen to
and control the body. As body awareness goes up, therefore, so does pacing
skill. But there are nuances to the process. Endurance training and
competition do not increase body awareness in a simple, blanket fashion.
Instead they lead to specific adaptations in body awareness that serve the
runner’s special interests. Take pain, for example. A 2020 study by
Norwegian researchers compared pain processing in athletes (including
distance runners) and nonathletes. Athletes were found to have a higher
pain threshold (meaning higher levels of exposure to a painful stimulus
were required before they registered pain) and a higher pain tolerance
(meaning higher levels of a pain stimulus were required before they
voluntarily withdrew from the stimulus) than nonathletes.
These results might seem to suggest that athletes have less body
awareness than nonathletes, who are more sensitive and reactive to pain.
But what they really indicate is a more adaptive relationship with pain,
where the athlete has greater control of the perception. After breaking the
men’s world record for the marathon in Chicago, Kenya’s Kelvin Kiptum
was asked by a reporter if he had ever felt pain during any of his marathons.
“I haven’t,” he said. This was an honest statement, I’m sure, yet I’m equally
sure that if another person had felt what Kiptum was feeling in the final
miles of his record-breaking performance, they would have called it pain. In
any case, what’s certain is that Kiptum’s relationship with pain was a major
reason he ran faster than any human ever had.
A pair of studies conducted by Welsh researchers and published in PLOS
One in 2023 compared interoception in elite and nonelite runners and
nonathletes. They found that runners exhibited more bodily trust and less
body listening (or active attentional focus on body sensations) than
nonathletes and that elite runners did even less body listening than nonelite
runners. Like the pain study just described, these results suggest that
endurance training and racing alter body awareness in ways that place the
runner’s mind in control, able to selectively tune out sensations that impede
their goal pursuit and harness those that aid it.
The most illuminating experiments on body awareness in athletes are
those demonstrating a direct connection between interoception and
--- PAGE 73 ---
performance. An example is a 2011 study by researchers at the University
of Lille involving 25 cyclists representing three levels of competitiveness:
local, regional, and national. In the first part of the experiment, the cyclists
were exposed to small doses of different exercise intensities and asked to
estimate how long they could last at each. In the second part, the cyclists
rode as long as they could at one of these intensities. All four of the locally
competitive cyclists gave highly inaccurate predictions of their time to
exhaustion, whereas four of the six national-caliber cyclists were spot-on in
their estimates. The researchers concluded, “High-level athletes may be
more consciously attuned to their bodies and their own effort sense as a
result of greater exercise experience. They are more familiar with the
signals of exertion emanating from acute cardiorespiratory, thermal and
metabolic changes associated with an increase in exercise intensity than
low-level athletes. Consequently, the task of interpreting these cues and
using them to estimate their exhaustion time may be less prone to error and
therefore may be less variable in this group.”
There you have it. The goal of racing is to find one’s limit, and the
superior body awareness enjoyed by experienced and high-level athletes
makes them better able to feel their way to their limit in competition. If an
athlete’s limit were fixed, mind you, this wouldn’t matter much. They
would have little need to adapt their pace to what they felt because their
highest sustainable work rate would always be the same. In fact, though, the
limit is ever-changing based on internal factors such as fitness and external
conditions such as air temperature. Humans cannot run long distances as
quickly in hot environments as in cool environments because doing so
would cause the core body temperature to increase to dangerous levels. If
we couldn’t feel our bodies, we might try anyway, starting hot races at our
normal speed and being forced to slow down or stop when we overheated.
Thankfully, we can feel our bodies, so we instead reduce our pace very
early in hot races, in reaction to sensed heat, when our core body
temperature is still well below the danger zone. In fact, ingenious
experiments involving radiant heat exposure have demonstrated that
athletes pace themselves more conservatively even when it’s just their skin
that is warm and their core body temperature isn’t affected at all.
A Master Class in Body-Aware Pacing
--- PAGE 74 ---
Not all runners have the level of body awareness needed to make the best
pacing decisions. Even Olympians sometimes fail to make appropriate
adjustments in adverse conditions. The 2004 Olympic Women’s Marathon,
for example, was held on a torrid summer evening in Athens, Greece.
Despite a delayed start, the surface temperature was 95 degrees Fahrenheit
when the racers bolted from the start line in Marathon, the ancient city that
gave the event its name. Tucked away near the back of the throng was
Deena Kastor of Team USA, heeding instructions she’d received from her
husband, Andrew, 2 hours earlier in a cell phone call she’d placed to report
on the conditions. “Just go slow,” he’d said.
Not everyone did. The gold-medal favorite, Paula Radcliffe of Great
Britain, surged to an early lead, trailing a retinue of sweat-soaked
contenders unwilling to let the world record holder get away despite the
punishing heat. Kastor, meanwhile, ran as though the others didn’t exist,
seeking shade wherever possible, drinking twice as much as she normally
would, and holding a pace that, although markedly slower than she’d run in
breaking the American marathon record in London the year before, was the
fastest she felt she could sustain all the way to the Olympic Stadium in
Athens. Whether or not it was fast enough to put her on the medal stand
remained to be seen.
At 5 kilometers, Kastor was in 28th place, but the inevitable attrition
began soon afterward, with runners who hadn’t bothered to adjust cracking
one by one. By 10 kilometers, Kastor had moved up to 17th place, and at
the halfway point, only 11 runners remained in front of her. The only
problem was that the leaders were way in front of her—nearly 2 minutes,
and it seemed unlikely that 9 or more of those 11 would also crack, thereby
opening the door for the pint-size Californian to snag a podium slot. But
then Kenya’s Margaret Okayo blew up, followed by her countrywoman
Alice Chelangat, and then Radcliffe herself, who was seated on a curb,
sobbing, when Kastor passed her 3.8 miles from the finish line. With less
than a mile to go, a wobbling Elfenesh Alemu of Ethiopia ceded third place
to Kastor, who powered home to claim the first Olympic marathon medal
for an American woman since Joan Benoit won gold in Los Angeles in
1984.
Deena Kastor’s performance in the 2004 Olympic Women’s Marathon
was a master class in pacing and an object lesson on the value of body
--- PAGE 75 ---
awareness in the exercise of pacing skill. As it relates to running, this
mental trait encompasses the full range of perceptions, beginning with the
perception of effort, which, when properly attended to, can “tell” a runner
how hard to push at any given moment of a race or workout. A runner who
has a high level of body awareness just knows whether to speed up, slow
down, or hold steady. Don’t bother asking them to explain how. Body
awareness, as it applies to pacing, is not unlike a singer’s ability to match
any pitch or an oenophile’s ability to taste eight different flavors in a sip of
wine. “Can’t you hear that?” asks the singer. “Can’t you taste that?” asks
the wine connoisseur. And “Didn’t you know that pace was too fast?”
Deena Kastor might have asked the 25 runners who were ahead of her at the
5K point and behind her at the finish.
As I suggested in the preceding chapter, one of the reasons so many
runners can’t feel their bodies as well as the likes of Deena Kastor is that
they don’t grow up running, as she did. And I believe our 21st-century
lifestyle also deserves some blame, its many comforts and conveniences
having in a very real sense divorced our minds from our bodies. Such
comforts and conveniences remain largely lacking in rural Kenya and
Ethiopia, and this reality—the greater physicality of life in these places—
may be yet another contributor to the success of the distance runners
produced there.
So if you are not from these more active places, and you did not start
running competitively in the sixth grade like Deena Kastor, how do you
acquire the level of body attunement required to be a pacing master? I
believe the most helpful things you can do are (1) make perceived effort
your primary intensity metric in your training, at least for a while; (2)
practice specific forms of mindfulness that are intended to enhance
interoceptive sensitivity; and (3) perform certain types of runs that
challenge body awareness. I will show you how to do all of these things in
later chapters.
Judgment
Pacing is, from one perspective, a series of decisions. Throughout each
race, runners decide—sometimes consciously, other times at a gut level—to
speed up, slow down, or maintain. A well-paced race, therefore, is the result
--- PAGE 76 ---
of a lot of good decisions and few or no bad ones, which is another way of
saying it is the result of good judgment. In this respect, running is far from
unique among self-regulatory tasks. Remember, self-regulation is all about
guiding one’s behavior in pursuit of goals, and from weight loss to earning
a law degree, it’s hard to think of a goal that doesn’t require making
decisions.
Human decision-making has been studied since as far back as Plato, but
increasingly scientists are approaching the subject from a self-regulatory
perspective. Among the leading researchers in this area is Jacob Hirsh, a
psychologist at the University of Toronto. In his PhD thesis, which was
submitted and approved in 2010, Hirsh observed, “Pitting long-term goals
against short-term desires is among the most difficult tasks in human
decision-making.” It is also precisely the kind of decision-making runners
must do in races, where the long-term goal of getting to the finish line as
quickly as possible is pitted against short-term desires that include not
wanting to experience the discomfort that attends striving for one’s limit.
According to Hirsh, making these types of decisions involves a competition
between “‘hot’ reward-focused impulses and ‘cool’ cognitive control
mechanisms.” The more successful the decision-maker is in overriding
impulses when they are inconsistent with long-term goals, the more likely it
is that a favorable outcome will be achieved.
To do their job effectively in these situations, the “cool” cognitive control
mechanisms Hirsh refers to must be not only strong enough to override
impulses but also keen enough to correctly judge when an impulse threatens
to lead the decision-maker astray. In other words, the job of the “cool”
system entails performance monitoring and error detection as well as
decision-making and decision enforcement.
A brain area called the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is known to play
an important role in these processes. Researchers commonly use an
instrument known as the Stroop test to measure how well this part of the
brain performs. Subjects are shown a series of individual words, all of
which are names of primary colors, and each of which is presented in a
primary-colored font. Sometimes the word and the font color match; other
times they don’t. The task of the test taker is to state the font color as
quickly as possible, which is trickier than it sounds because one’s instinct is
to simply read the word. Performance is judged by the number of errors the
--- PAGE 77 ---
subject makes and by how quickly answers are given. In research versions
of the Stroop test, including Hirsh’s, brain scans are conducted throughout
the process. What these images reveal (among other things) is that when a
subject realizes they have committed an error, the event is marked by an
electrophysiological signal known as error-related negativity (ERN) in the
ACC. The magnitude of the ERN is considered an indicator of the subject’s
ability to monitor their performance and to make performance-maximizing
decisions, with larger magnitudes demonstrating greater ability in these
areas.
As part of his thesis, Hirsh measured ERN magnitudes in a group of 31
college students as they completed a Stroop test. He then monitored the
students’ academic performance over the span of an entire school year, his
expectation being that students with stronger cognitive control mechanisms,
as evidenced by greater ERN magnitudes, would earn better grades. Hirsh
explained his reasoning as follows: “Self-regulatory processes are thought
to play an important role in the maintenance of academic goals. . . .
Conceptually, this is because student GPA reflects the composite of many
decisions made across a long period of time. For instance, a student has to
decide on any given evening whether to study for a class or visit some
friends. The result of each of these micro-decisions (each one a self-
regulatory challenge) is reflected in ultimate academic performance. . . .
Self-regulation reflects an improved ability to evaluate one’s behaviour and
engage the cool cognitive system whenever it is needed to sustain progress
toward long-term goals.” Sure enough, Hirsh found that students who
exhibited stronger ERN signals during the Stroop test tended to get better
grades.
The parallels between collegiate academic performance and running
races are obvious. In much the same way a high GPA is the result of many
small studying decisions, a well-executed race is the result of many small
pacing decisions. We might therefore expect to see a link between Stroop
test performance and running performance—and indeed we do. In 2015, the
journal PLOS One published a study in which scientists at the University of
Padua had 30 runners complete a pair of tests similar to the Stroop test that
was designed to assess response inhibition or the ability of the cool
cognitive control mechanisms to shut down hot reward-focused impulses.
On the morning after these tests were completed, the runners participated in
an 80 km ultramarathon, following which they were statistically separated
--- PAGE 78 ---
into two groups: “faster runners” and “slower runners.” Despite the fact that
the decision-making tests were done at rest on a computer in street clothes
and looked nothing at all like a running race, those who did well in one
were found to have done better in the other also, evidence that better
decision-making leads to better race execution.
The influence of judgment on pacing helps explain why female runners
are generally better than male runners at pacing longer races, as was
demonstrated in a 2021 study published in Frontiers in Sports and Active
Living. Barry Smyth and Aonghus Lawlor at University College Dublin
analyzed data from devices worn by more than 158,000 runners during a
marathon and found that the average male runner lost 4.49 minutes
compared to the average female runner as a result of starting too fast and
losing steam. Other research has shown that men are generally more prone
to risk-taking than women and that women’s brains exhibit greater activity
in the cool cognitive control centers of the brain when taking risks. Not all
risks are the result of bad judgment, but aggressive starts to longer races are
a bad judgment call that comes at a cost, to men especially. None of this
means that male runners can’t be as good as female runners at pacing longer
races (as the example I’m about to share with you makes clear), but it does
underscore the point that great pacing is impossible without good judgment.
What Good Pacing Judgment Looks Like
As I mentioned earlier, the mental trait we use to make good decisions is
judgment. An example of what good judgment looks like when exercised in
competition by a pacing master is Yuki Kawauchi’s performance at the
2018 Boston Marathon. Yuki came to the race as a fan favorite but by no
means a betting favorite to win. Nicknamed the “Citizen Runner,” he
worked a full-time job with the Japanese government and raced with
legendary frequency. Indeed, he held the world record for the most sub-2:20
marathons run by a single athlete, but his PB of 2:08:14 was slower than
those of defending champion Geoffrey Kirui (2:06:27) and several others in
the field. Nevertheless, Yuki himself believed he could win if he played his
cards right.
His plan was to go hard from the gun, a risky strategy that became even
riskier when a nasty spring storm struck the Boston area on race morning.
Despite facing a 25 mph headwind, Yuki went ahead with his gamble,
--- PAGE 79 ---
running the first mile alone in 4:37. But his intent was not to lead the race
from wire to wire. To have any chance of winning, Yuki knew he needed to
make the race as hard as possible for everyone, so he was far from
disappointed when the other contenders chased him down, engulfing the
mismatched agitator (green vest, gray hat, red arm warmers, white gloves,
orange shoes) at 5 km. Yuki then made a smart tactical shift, tucking in
behind the taller Kirui and gathering his energy as he awaited the inevitable
slowdown. When it came, he surged again, refusing to let his competitors
get comfortable. A pattern formed: Over the next 20 kilometers, Yuki yo-
yoed between brash pacemaking and cagey slipstreaming, doing just
enough to keep his companions miserable. But Kirui had plans of his own,
and when a whittled lead pack hit the hallowed hills of Newton, he revealed
them, launching away so decisively that he was soon invisible, 90 seconds
ahead of his nearest chaser.
Of the six runners caught flat-footed by the defending champion’s attack,
five had no choice in the matter—they were cooked. Only Yuki held back
purposely, and it was his best decision in a day full of good decisions.
Having scouted the second half of the racecourse on foot the day before
(and the day before that), he felt Kirui’s attack was too much too soon, and
so he waited until he’d topped the dream-crushing Heartbreak Hill to give
chase. By then, the defending champion was paying the price for his
premature aggression. Yuki, half-blinded by fatigue and the elements,
barely noticed passing the cratering Kenyan underneath the landmark Citgo
sign en route to becoming the most unlikely Boston Marathon winner in
recent memory.
Pundits credited Yuki’s grit for his victory over faster rivals, but I believe
his judgment was the decisive factor in this instance. Yuki had a smart plan,
he was well prepared, and he executed his plan with the right mix of
discipline and adaptability. There are five different modes in which
judgment applies to pacing: planning, reactive tactical decisions, attentional
focus, emotional self-regulation, and self-talk. Yuki handled all five of these
modes masterfully before and during the 2018 Boston Marathon. Having set
himself up for success by familiarizing himself with the course and
committing to a fast start (planning), he ensured his success by pushing at
the right times and not the wrong times (reactive tactical decisions), not
getting discouraged when Kirui opened up a large lead (emotional self-
regulation), ignoring everyone around him except the runners he judged
--- PAGE 80 ---
most dangerous (attentional focus), and urging himself to finish with his
best running in the final miles (self-talk).
Chances are you will never find yourself needing to practice good
judgment in precisely the same ways Yuki did in order to win a future
Boston Marathon, but you will need to handle the five modes of pacing-
related decision-making with a similar degree of competence to achieve
your best results, and I will show you how in the next chapter.
Toughness
The word toughness doesn’t sound terribly scientific, but it is a recognized
term in sports psychology. I find it interesting that every major running
culture has a specific word for the same basic trait. In Finland they talk of
sisu, which is usually translated as “spirit.” The Ethiopian equivalent is
adegenna, which means “dangerousness.” Japanese runners strive for
ganbaru, or “perseverance.” And when American running legend Steve
Prefontaine tossed around the word guts, his fellow anglophone runners
knew exactly what he meant.
The many words for this one special quality that all great runners seem to
possess tell us the phenomenon is both real and mysterious, definite yet
difficult to define. Scholars of mental toughness agree. In a 2019 review
paper, a group of authors led by Garry Kuan of Universiti Sains Malaysia
observed, “Mental toughness appears to be multidimensional and most
often associated with unshakable self-belief, the ability to rebound after
failures (resilience), persistence or refusal to quit, coping effectively with
adversity and pressure, and retaining concentration in the face of many
potential distractions.”
Sounds about right. But is mental toughness a single thing—as the
umbrella term toughness suggests—or a bunch of related things, as
suggested by the laundry list of qualities lumped together beneath this
umbrella? The prevailing opinion among psychologists is that toughness is
indeed a single, albeit multifaceted, thing. Among those who hold this view
is Angela Duckworth, a researcher at the University of Pennsylvania who in
2016 coauthored a paper titled “Grit: Sustained Self-Regulation in the
Service of Superordinate Goals.” In it, Duckworth and her collaborators
argue that toughness (or grit) is essentially everything other than motivation
--- PAGE 81 ---
that enables and compels people to give everything they’ve got to complete
a task or achieve a goal.
What I like about Duckworth’s definition of toughness is that it’s
operational rather than conceptual, meaning it defines the phenomenon in
terms of what it does and not by what it is. As such, it aligns with how the
average person recognizes toughness. When we see a person persist in a
challenge despite pain, suffering, hardship, fear, doubt, or long odds, we
call it toughness, while Duckworth calls it sustained self-regulation in the
service of superordinate goals, which is the same thing. This behavioral
view of toughness puts an end to tedious debates about whether it is one
thing or many and avoids the circularity of explaining a trait with other
traits. Toughness is less a way of being than a way of doing, and any
number of different traits may combine in a person to yield tough action.
Perfect race execution is a terrific example of a superordinate goal that
requires self-regulation, hence toughness. To my knowledge, there is no
existing scientific research demonstrating a direct connection between
toughness and pacing skill, but there is plenty of indirect evidence. In
ultramarathons, for example, failure to finish (referred to as “did not
finish,” or DNF) serves as a pretty good proxy for pacing skill—and for the
toughness component of pacing skill, in particular. In a 2021 study,
researchers at the University of Oviedo looked for correlations between
various psychological variables and DNFs in a group of 356 participants in
a mountain race. Of these runners, only 148 managed to complete the
course. The strongest psychological predictors of a successful finish,
according to the study’s authors, were mental toughness and resilience
(which overlaps with mental toughness). And not only that, but the toughest
and most resilient runners among the nonquitters finished fastest.
Running is a painful sport, and as such, it selects for tough individuals
who aren’t afraid of a little suffering. But within the running population,
some athletes are willing and able to suffer more than others, and only those
who are willing to suffer the most realize their full potential in races.
Remember, running performance is ultimately limited by perception of
effort and not by fitness, which merely constrains performance.
A Lesson in Grit
--- PAGE 82 ---
The first half of the 2017 Run Rabbit Run 100-mile trail race was hard, but
not harder than any other ultramarathon Courtney Dauwalter had done. She
felt oddly out of sorts from the start, a feeling that wasn’t helped by the
4,000-foot climb under a baking Colorado sun that served as the race’s
appetizer. Her husband Kevin’s smile gave way to a look of concern as she
stumbled into the first aid station at Mount Werner.
“I feel like I’ve run 70 miles already,” she said.
She’d run 20 miles.
Shortly after leaving another aid station, Courtney threw up the entire
contents of her stomach. This is fine, she thought (as she always did when it
wasn’t fine). In a sense, though, it was fine. There’d been rough patches in
most of her prior ultras, including the previous year’s edition of this very
race, which she’d won. Sure enough, clouds rolled in as Courtney picked
her way toward the aid station at Dry Lake, where she restocked her
stomach with mashed potatoes and took the lead from Michelle Yates, and
by 78 miles, she was feeling unstoppable, enjoying the playlist she’d
prepared for the race and contemplating the course record.
That’s when she noticed there was something wrong with her vision. It
was half past two in the morning, and the temperature had dropped into the
forties, so at first Courtney wondered if the haze she saw was fog, or
perhaps her contact lenses were freezing. Only when she caught her toe on
an unseen root and sprawled to the dirt did she acknowledge that the
problem was internal and not helped by splashing water in her eyes.
She resumed running, spurred by the assumption that Lacy or another
competitor was on her heels, and tumbled several times more as her sight
worsened, the objects ahead smearing around the edges, the horizon
flattening. She kept mum at the next aid station, letting people wonder
about her bruises and grime-smeared clothes, but by the time she reached
the final support stop back at Mount Werner, this was impossible. She’d
smashed her forehead on a rock after tripping yet again and was bleeding
copiously. By that point she’d gone completely blind, the pesky haze that
first caught her attention intensifying to a perfect whiteout. Her world had
collapsed to nothing, her shoes vanishing from sight beneath her, then her
watch disappearing from her wrist (which had stopped in an earlier fall, so
no matter). Upon rising from the dirt and feeling liquid dripping down the
left side of her face, she wiped her fingers across her forehead and
--- PAGE 83 ---
inspected them for blood, but even with her palm held right in front of her
nose, she couldn’t tell.
At no point did Courtney consider stopping or even reducing her pace
from a run to a walk. Nor was she alarmed at the strangeness of her sudden
blindness. To her it was just the latest challenge, categorically equal to more
common ultramarathon challenges like sore legs and puking. One of the
hallmark characteristics of toughness is a kind of stoical indifference to
difficulties of all kinds. It’s not that tough people don’t suffer. They just
don’t care. All roads are the same to them. Whether smooth or rocky, up or
down, they lead to the destination, which is all that matters.
As she bombed her way down the single-track Mountain View Trail
(having chucked one of her contacts to test whether she’d see better without
it—she didn’t), Courtney encountered a series of runners in the 50-mile
division making their way toward her. Although she couldn’t see them, she
heard their cries of alarm. Whoa! Are you okay? The humor of her
predicament wasn’t lost on Courtney. At least I’m making their day a little
more interesting, she thought. She smiled at the mental image of a brown
bear pausing its breakfast as she lurched past and wondering, What the hell
was that?
“I have a little bit of a problem,” she confessed to the volunteers at
Mount Werner.
Unable to persuade Courtney to quit, the aid station captain radioed race
director Paul Sachs and got his permission to send a guide with Courtney
for the remaining 6 miles. Pacers are not permitted at Run Rabbit Run, so
the guide ran behind her, calling out warnings like “Sharp right turn ahead!”
and “It’s about to get a little steeper!” The last section of the course along
the Storm Peak Challenge Trail was undulating. Powerless to anticipate its
rises and dips, Courtney plowed into the former like a barge on high seas
and felt her stomach flip like a roller coaster rider when the trail dropped
out from underneath her feet.
The finish line was marked by a giant red balloon sculpture. Courtney ran
unseeing straight through it and into the arms of Paul Sachs, who for all she
knew was “just some random creeper,” as she joked in a later interview. Her
vision returned gradually over the next several hours.
Performances like this one are deeply inspiring because they show us
what is possible with a strong mind. At the same time, they are somewhat
--- PAGE 84 ---
intimidating—because they show us what is possible with a strong mind!
“What’s your excuse?” they seem to ask. To watch a Courtney Dauwalter
compete is to be forced to admit that we have not yet found our limit in the
toughness department. No runner can claim to have paced a race optimally
unless they have left absolutely everything they had to give out on the
course, and runners like Courtney are only too happy to remind us of this
fact.
What does it take to give it 100 percent? I’ll answer this question by
asking another: Do you remember the lesson of The Wizard of Oz? In giving
the Scarecrow a diploma, the Tin Man a testimonial, and the Cowardly Lion
a medal of courage, the Wizard pointed out that only a person who had a
brain would want a brain, and that only a person who had a heart would
want a heart, and, yes, that only a person who had courage (or toughness)
would want it. If, as a runner, you earnestly desire to become tougher,
you’re already halfway there. The rest is just details. As American record
holder Ryan Hall said, “The best way to become a mentally tough runner is
to believe that you’re a mentally tough runner.”
There’s much more to be said about the mind of the pacing master, where
toughness combines so fruitfully with body awareness and judgment. Let’s
have a look inside.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 85 ---
5
The Mind of a Pacing Master
The best pacer I’ve ever run with is Ben Bruce, a now retired professional
runner and former member of the Flagstaff-based HOKA Northern Arizona
Elite team. When I joined the group as an honorary member in the summer
of 2017, I was far too slow to do anything other than easy runs with Ben
and his fellow elites, but as luck would have it, Ben was injured that
summer, and he was kind enough to pace me through a few key sessions
while rehabbing what, at the time, he thought was a hip flexor strain but
turned out to be a pelvic stress fracture.
The first of these sessions was a long progression run on Lake Mary
Road, a hallowed proving ground for Flagstaff-based marathoners. As Ben
ran alongside me, I was struck not only by his ability to nail the mile splits I
gave him but also by how much thought he put into the process. Aware that
I would be doing a lot more running, most of it alone, on the same highway
in the coming weeks, Ben shared a litany of tips on how to stay on pace,
noting tricky false flats, exposed stretches where headwinds were common,
sharp descents that offered opportunities to bank time, and so forth.
In light of this experience, I wasn’t the least bit surprised when Ben later
transitioned into a coaching role with NAZ Elite that involved extensive
pacing work. His pièce de résistance was a job leading Keira D’Amato to
the seventh-fastest marathon time ever recorded by an American woman
(2:22:56) at the 2020 Marathon Project in Chandler, Arizona. It was, I’ll
grant, a relatively straightforward pacing task, given the course’s pancake-
flat, multiloop layout, which facilitated a steady rhythm, but Ben made it
look much easier than it was, shepherding Keira through 5 km splits of
17:02, 16:58, 17:02, 16:59, 16:55, 16:59, 16:55, and 16:56 before Keira
dropped the hammer over the last 2.2 km as Ben peeled off.
If you’re skeptical of the notion that some runners have an innate knack
for pacing, good luck explaining Ben Bruce’s mastery. Raised in San Diego,
he got a relatively late start as a running specialist, competing in his first-
--- PAGE 86 ---
ever track race as a college freshman after earning varsity letters in golf,
soccer, and cross country during his high school years. Yet despite having
less experience than his fellow Cal Poly Mustangs, Ben was by far the most
reliable pacer on the team. In acknowledgment of this, the senior captains
awarded him the pressure-laden honor of leading the crucial first repetition
in workouts.
In Chapter 8, we’ll talk about macropacing, or pacing on a long time
scale. Many if not most runners who are good at pacing individual runs are
equally good at pacing their overall running career. Ben proved to be great
at both, pacing himself to a professional running career that lasted nearly 2
decades, earning the distinction of being the only runner ever to qualify for
and compete in 16 straight USATF Outdoor Championships. And though he
might not like my mentioning it, Ben is also the only runner ever to have
finished 10th, 9th, 8th, 7th, 6th, 5th, 4th, 3rd, and 2nd—but never 1st—in
national championship races.
The secret to Ben’s pacing mastery is no secret. Like all pacing masters,
Ben is a virtuosic self-regulator on the roads, trails, and track, endowed
with all three of the key mental traits that pacing skill depends on. Body
awareness? Check. Ben showed exceptional interoceptive at the 2023 Big
Sur Marathon, which he started on tired legs, having raced the Boston
Marathon just 6 days before. Battling vicious headwinds gusting up to 35
miles per hour (not to mention 2,192 feet of climbing), Ben tuned his effort
perfectly to the unique conditions, finishing 46 seconds ahead of the fast-
closing second-place runner with his last drop of energy. Judgment? Also
check. Ben’s remarkable judgment was expressed in a patient, methodical,
even-keeled approach to training and development that enabled him to just
keep getting better and better year after year. “I have always had a
consistent mindset,” he said in a 2012 interview for RunCoach.com.
“Chipping away at times over the years has been the way that I have gotten
to where I am as a runner today. . . . Not any one workout will make you a
superstar, but a bunch of solid ones will make you super strong and ready to
race.” Toughness? Checkmate! I saw Ben’s toughness firsthand in the
summer of 2017, when he ran through the pain of an as-yet undiagnosed
pelvic stress fracture that would have immobilized most runners.
As a coach, Ben shares my belief that you don’t have to be a natural-born
pacing master like him to become one. The preceding chapters served to
--- PAGE 87 ---
define the mission: To master the skill of pacing, one must cultivate the
capacity to self-regulate both during runs (exercising behavioral control in
relation to the goal of finding one’s limit) and between runs (exercising
behavioral control in relation to the goal of learning to pace better).
Cultivating the capacity to self-regulate, in turn, requires the development
of body awareness, judgment, and toughness. The goal of this chapter is to
offer practical instruction on how to do this. None of the methods you’ll
learn here qualifies as a quick fix, much less a “hack.” The road to pacing
mastery is long, but there’s a prize at the end of it—the sublime joy of
running free, which is to say, of knowing what you can do and then going
out and doing it every time.
Learning Body Awareness
A distinction can be made between general body awareness and task-
specific body awareness. General body awareness, or interoceptive
sensitivity, is the broad capacity to feel one’s body, which is measured
through tests such as counting one’s heartbeats by feel. Specific body
awareness is the trained feel for certain body parts or movements that
comes through skill development. The task-specific body awareness that,
for example, a tightrope walker develops through training for his vocation
is different from the body awareness that a runner develops through training
for her sport. Whereas the tightrope walker learns a refined sense of
balance, the runner hones a precise perception of effort as well as other
kinds of interoceptive sensitivity, including the kind Kenenisa Bekele used
to keep his hamstring from shredding while fighting to remain in contention
for victory in the 2019 Berlin Marathon.
As a runner, you’re not interested in developing forms of body awareness
that have little relevance to your sport. The time and energy you invest in
improving your body awareness need to go toward measures that offer the
greatest benefit to your running. Three of my favorites are body scanning,
condition assessment, and time-limit estimation.
Body Scanning
Research has demonstrated that meditation and other forms of mindfulness
(a state of receptive attention to the present moment) improve body
--- PAGE 88 ---
awareness by modulating the insula, a brain region involved in
interoception. Body scanning is a mindfulness practice that targets body
awareness directly, and it can be done both during running and at rest.
Running Body Scan
To scan your body while running, focus your attention on one small piece of
your overall experience at a time, pausing long enough to notice everything
there is to notice before moving on to the next piece. Your breathing is a
good place to start. Don’t try to control or change it; just notice it. Take
some time to attend to your perception of effort. Try to pick up its nuances.
Words such as hard and easy don’t even begin to capture all that’s going on
with effort perception at any given moment. For example, the sort of hard
effort you might experience when running slowly in a state of extreme
fatigue is very different from the sort you might experience during the third
lap of a 1-mile track race.
Other aspects of the running experience you can focus on include
soreness and other forms of discomfort in your musculoskeletal system, the
rhythm of your arm and leg movements, specific parts of your body (even
your toes!), the tension in your face and shoulders, your perception of speed
and movement through space, and the various interfaces between your body
and the environment: contact between your feet and the ground,
gravitational resistance, and the feeling of air brushing against your skin.
Runners are always aware of their bodies when running, of course, but
conducting a formal body scan while running is as different from this
default awareness as meditation is from daydreaming. The goal is not to
scan your body continuously throughout every run—that would drive you
nuts. Focusing too much on internal perceptions is actually harmful to
performance, for reasons I will explain when we explore race pacing in
Chapter 7. Just scan your body for a few minutes at a time when it crosses
your mind to do so. Over time, you will develop a better sense of how to
interpret and use what you’re feeling to inform your pacing decisions.
Body Scan Meditation
If you practice meditation, adding body scan meditations to your routine
can be a nice complement to running body scans. These can be done
anytime—before a run, after a run, or whenever you normally meditate. Sit
--- PAGE 89 ---
comfortably in a quiet environment and allow your attention to roam from
one focal point to the next. Start by attending to the overall position of your
body, then concentrate on where you are in space and how you’re feeling
generally (e.g., warm, calm, thirsty). Next, seek out areas of tension in your
body, just noticing the feeling rather than trying to get rid of it, and then
shift to your breathing. Now move your attention slowly from the top of
your head to your face, neck, shoulders, chest and heart, arms, torso,
stomach, bottom, upper legs, knees, lower legs, ankles, feet, and toes.
Finally, do the whole thing in reverse, returning step by step to the overall
position of your body.
If you’re so inclined, include a heart rate estimation test in the occasional
body scan meditation. To do this, you will need to wear a heart rate monitor
with a timer. Take a few moments to focus your attention on the feeling of
your heart muscle’s contractions. Start the timer and begin to count the
contractions. Continue for 1 minute, then stop the time and check your total
against the current heart rate reading on your watch. See if you can improve
your accuracy with repeated practice. You can be sure that any
improvement you do achieve will translate into better interoceptive
sensitivity when running, hence better pacing ability.
Condition Assessment
When I last spoke to Ben Bruce, I asked him how fast he thought he could
run a 10K race at his present fitness level. Without hesitation, he answered,
“Twenty-nine something.” Mind you, Ben wasn’t training for a 10K at the
time. His recent running had lacked any real structure, consisting of a mix
of pacing work for NAZ Elite members and easy runs done on a catch-as-
catch-can basis. Yet he seemed quite confident in his prediction, and I have
no doubt that his answer would have proved accurate had he given in to my
arm-twisting and actually raced a 10K the next day.
Where does this kind of self-knowledge come from? I believe it comes
largely from condition assessment, a practice whereby runners use each and
every run they do to assess their present fitness level. This is something all
runners—including those who struggle with pacing—do when
circumstances demand it, such as when a runner who is training for a 10K
race does a set of intervals targeting a 10K race pace. But pacing masters
like Ben conduct a form of condition assessment in all their runs, and the
--- PAGE 90 ---
sheer volume of information generated through this habit is what makes the
difference. Put another way, what makes a pacing master a pacing master is
that they get a feel for how fast they could race a 10K not just from a 10K-
pace workout performed on relatively fresh legs but also from a random,
short recovery run performed on tired legs the day after a hard workout.
To succeed in gleaning information about your fitness level from runs of
various kinds, you must properly contextualize what you’re feeling. Let’s
return to the example of a run that comes the day after a hard workout. It’s
likely, of course, that you will feel tired and run slow in any such run. But
it’s possible that you will feel somewhat less tired and go somewhat faster
than you have in recent runs performed in similar circumstances, and if you
do, you may conclude from this information that your training is going well
and you’re getting fitter.
When conducting condition assessments, it’s helpful to place today’s run
in an even broader context, comparing how you’re feeling and performing
—all things considered—against how you’ve felt and performed in similar
circumstances in previous training cycles. Again, one such comparison
won’t tell you much, but routine comparisons of this type will aid you in
setting goals and performance expectations for upcoming races.
Just be careful not to allow your condition assessments to become a
source of anxiety. Approached with the wrong mindset, this practice could
easily cause you to train in a state of perpetual worry about whether you are
on track toward a goal, sort of like how weighing yourself too often or
obsessively checking your stock portfolio can make you freak out
needlessly. It’s a matter of keeping perspective. If you complete a long run
on a hot day after a poor night’s sleep with 13 weeks remaining before a
marathon, when you’re still relatively far from peak fitness, don’t interpret
the misery you experience in the late miles as proof that you’re doomed to
fail in your marathon. Conduct your condition assessments with a mindset
of neutral curiosity. Account for everything—the heat, the lack of sleep,
your modest fitness level, the 13 weeks you’ve got to get fully race-ready—
in assessing your condition, and maintain the same neutral mindset in all of
your condition assessments. Don’t interpret your runs as if your race is
tomorrow unless, in fact, your race is tomorrow.
Time-Limit Estimation
--- PAGE 91 ---
Another simple exercise that you can perform routinely in the course of
your normal training is time-limit estimation. This practice entails asking
yourself how long you think you could sustain your present pace or,
alternatively, selecting a pace you feel you could sustain for a specific
amount of time. Like condition assessments, time-limit estimation, when
used intentionally as a tool for learning body awareness, is nothing more
than a broadened application of something all runners do automatically in
races and time trials, during which every runner estimates, consciously or
unconsciously, how long they can keep up their current pace.
Experience supplies runners with a general idea of how long it’s going to
take to complete a run, and at each point along the way, we ask ourselves,
explicitly or implicitly, Can I hold this pace the rest of the way?
Experiments like the University of Lille study mentioned in Chapter 4 have
shown that higher-performing endurance athletes are better at estimating
how long they can sustain a given output, and that’s why conscious time-
limit estimation is a worthwhile pacing exercise.
Like condition assessments (and body scanning), this exercise is one you
can sprinkle into your training in a playful way, employing it whenever the
mood strikes you. Again, we’re all accustomed to estimating our time limit
in races and time trials, but what I’m advocating is conscious use of the
same faculty in other situations—easy runs, long runs, tempo runs,
whenever. It’s just another way of making you more mindful of what your
body’s telling you about its abilities and limits.
Time-limit estimation is also useful as a way to regulate intensity in runs.
Such estimates may either replace or supplement objective metrics used for
the same purpose, such as pace. For example, most runners, regardless of
fitness or ability, are able to sustain their VO2max pace (or the slowest pace
at which they achieve their maximal rate of oxygen consumption) for about
6 minutes. Therefore, you can target VO2max intensity in an interval
workout by selecting a pace you feel you could sustain for 6 minutes.
Even when you do choose to use an objective measure as your primary
intensity metric in a given run, estimated time limits have a role to play,
helping you find the appropriate effort quickly before your device has a
chance to catch up to a shift in speed and also helping you adjust your pace
as you go based on factors like elevation change and fatigue. I’ll have more
to say on this subject in the next chapter.
--- PAGE 92 ---
Cultivating Judgment
Similar to body awareness, judgment operates on two levels: general and
task specific. At both levels, judgment expresses itself through decisions.
People who have general good judgment make good decisions in most areas
of their lives. But we all know people who make good decisions within a
special area of expertise while showing poor judgment in other areas. Every
great athlete makes consistently good decisions within their sport, but not
every great athlete also makes good decisions with money, in relationships,
and elsewhere. To master the skill of pacing, you will need to cultivate
better pacing judgment, and the way to do it is reasonably straightforward.
Research has shown that teaching athletes sport-specific decision-making
skills improves their judgment on the field of play. A 2013 study conducted
by Spanish researchers and published in PLOS One explored the effect of
decision-making skills training on junior tennis players. Eleven players
were separated into two groups, both of which played 18 full matches that
were videotaped. The first four matches were used to establish a baseline
(so to speak) of decision-making competence.
After each of the next 10 matches, the 5 members of the decision-making
skills training group sat down to review a tape of selected points with a
coach, who asked the players to explain and critically evaluate their
decisions in a guided manner. The six members of the control group
received no such training. In the last four matches, decision-making
competence was reassessed. On average, players in the decision-making
skills training group were found to have improved their decision-making
scores by 10 percent, whereas the players in the control group showed no
improvement.
In my one-on-one work with runners, I’ve found that a similarly
intentional approach to improving decision-making can improve pacing
judgment. The tool I rely on most for this purpose is decision tracking,
which is similar to the method used in the study just described. The key
difference is that there’s no video involved. It’s just a mental performance
review that can be done in the context of your training log. After each
workout or run involving important pacing decisions, devote some space in
your training log to assessing your decisions in the five areas that I first
enumerated in Chapter 4: planning, emotional self-regulation, self-talk,
tactical adjustments, and attentional focus.
--- PAGE 93 ---
Planning
Pacing decisions are made before a run even begins. This goes for both
races and training runs, but for now, let’s focus on training. Among the
decisions you’ll need to put some thought into before training runs are
where to run, what your pace and time targets will be, and who to run with.
There’s no need to fuss over such decisions ahead of less important
workouts, but when there’s a lot riding on a particular run, you’ll want to
set yourself up for success in every way possible (for example, find
someone like Ben Bruce to run with you!).
The most common mistake runners make in setting workout pace targets
is basing their decisions on their aspirations rather than on a realistic
assessment of their current fitness. Aspirational workout goals inevitably
lead to overreaching and frustration. Remember to always train as the
athlete you are today, not as the athlete you hope to be on race day.
Ensuring that your training consistently meets you where you are is
precisely how you become the athlete you hope to be down the road.
Be sure to give yourself credit for good decisions as readily as you call
yourself out for bad decisions. The researchers who conducted the tennis
experiment I just described made a point (so to speak) of having subjects
review as many situations in which they made the right decision as those in
which they chose the wrong move. So, for example, if procrastination left
you with no option other than to run in the heat of the afternoon, thereby
putting out of reach a target pace that would have been manageable in the
cool of the morning if you’d only gotten your lazy ass out of bed, take
yourself to task. And if you nail a workout after turning down an invitation
from a friend who always half-steps you and drags you out of your proper
rhythm, pat yourself on the back. In either case, the process will improve
future decisions.
Emotional Self-Regulation
Affect, or emotion, plays an important and underappreciated role in pacing.
Remember, pacing is the art of finding your limit, and negative thoughts
and feelings make it harder—impossible, really—to reach your true limit.
This was shown in a fascinating study conducted by researchers at the
University of Worcester and published in the International Journal of
Sports Physiology and Performance. Fourteen runners completed 10K
--- PAGE 94 ---
performance tests on two occasions—once alone and once in a group. On
average, they ran 58 seconds faster in the group test, yet their pacing
patterns were the same in both. The difference was that the runners
experienced higher levels of positive affect in the group 10K. In other
words, they ran closer to their limit with others because they were enjoying
themselves more.
You, too, will perform better if you keep your emotions within the
neutral-to-positive range and out of the negative zone in races and
workouts. One way to do this is with positive self-talk, which is the subject
of the next section. But before you can engage in positive self-talk, you
sometimes need to stop negative thoughts. This entails mentally “catching”
negative thoughts quickly and overriding them. For example, you might
start thinking “I hate how I’m feeling right now” during a workout, then
realize you’re thinking this and consciously put a stop to it. Doing so won’t
change the fact that you’re suffering, but it will keep your mind from
exacerbating the situation and dragging down your performance.
Acceptance is another technique that is proven to mitigate negative
thoughts and feelings during exercise and thereby enhance performance.
This entails making peace or being okay with your discomfort. You’re not
trying to persuade yourself that you’re not really uncomfortable—that
doesn’t work. Rather, you’re accepting your discomfort as a necessary part
of the task you’re performing. You can’t control how you feel when you’re
running, but you can control how you feel about how you feel, and
acceptance is the most performance-enhancing feeling you can possibly
have about exertional discomfort. Research has shown that consciously
accepting discomfort increases endurance performance. It’s mainly a matter
of embracing the fact that discomfort is inextricably linked to the things that
make finding your limit worthwhile for you. As the Nepalese elite
ultrarunner (and former adolescent guerrilla fighter) Mira Rai said in an
interview for the Mindful Running podcast, “Running makes me happy.
When you’re happy doing whatever you do, pain becomes secondary.”
Acceptance works best when it begins before running. You accept that
the run is going to hurt, and then, when it does, you accept that it does,
which is always easier to do when the discomfort is anticipated. In a 2021
interview for Athletics Weekly, Norwegian elite middle-distance runner
--- PAGE 95 ---
Jakob Ingebrigtsen described how he uses this anticipatory acceptance
technique in racing:
I usually get really nervous, not only because of my expectations but
it’s also about the pain. . . . I don’t enjoy being in pain. . . . If you are
really well prepared and you do what you need to do going into that
race, it’s going to end up pretty good, and you’re not going to feel that
much pain after all. But I know, going into my next race, I get really
nervous [again] because of the pain. But I think that’s my way of
preparing myself physically and mentally for each race—to be nervous
of the pain that’s coming but also to be awake and focused on the task
so I can run as fast as possible.
It’s worth mentioning that Ingebrigtsen was only 20 years old when he
spoke these words. You can be certain he wouldn’t have accomplished all
he had at such a young age (having already set numerous national and
European records and won European and World Championships medals,
he’s gone on to win three Olympic and World Championship gold medals)
without such a strong capacity for emotional self-regulation. Take a cue
from Jakob Ingebrigtsen and, as part of your postrun decision tracking, rate
how well you regulated your emotions before and during it. Give yourself
full credit for successful thought stopping and acceptance, and admit where
you fell short.
Self-Talk
I’ve always thought of “self-talk” as being a little corny. It brings to mind
children’s stories like The Little Engine That Could or Al Franken’s Stuart
Smalley sketch on Saturday Night Live—“I’m good enough, I’m smart
enough, and doggone it, people like me!” Corny or not, though, self-talk
impacts pacing, for better or worse. The kind of encouragement these
fictional characters gave themselves is proven to enhance endurance
performance. A study led by Samuele Marcora and published in Medicine &
Science in Sports & Exercise in 2014 reported that training in positive self-
talk improved performance in a high-intensity ride to exhaustion by 17
percent.
--- PAGE 96 ---
This type of “note to self” works best if it has personal significance or
addresses a specific need. One-size-fits-all mantras like “I think I can” are
better than nothing, but you’ll get more mileage out of phrases that speak to
your individual weaknesses and immediate challenges. For example, if you
are prone to self-doubt, and you find such feelings bubbling up at a tough
moment in a race or workout, you might choose to think, “Nothing to
prove,” to remind yourself that you are worthy, win or lose, and all that
matters is trying your best. And if you find yourself beginning to overheat
during a race and are concerned that dialing back your effort in response to
this feeling will put your podium ambitions in jeopardy, you might choose
to think, “It’s hot for everyone, not just me.”
Self-talk can also be used in more tactical ways to assist pacing. Two-
time Olympian and world champion Ajeé Wilson of the United States liked
to mentally divide her 800-meter races into two parts: the first 300 meters,
which were all about positioning herself for the last 500 meters, and those
painful last 500 meters, at the start of which she mentally recited the same
script every time: You’re okay. You’re comfortable. You’re fine.
Does every great half-miler use this same script? In other words, is
Wilson’s self-talk ritual necessary to optimize pacing in an 800-meter race?
It is not. But tactical self-reminders of some kind, which can vary from
runner to runner and from event to event, are required to find your limit,
and they are equally helpful in workouts that run below the limit. Over
time, decision tracking can help you discover the particular internal
messages that work best for you, just like Ajeé Wilson.
Tactical Adjustments
When Ben Bruce set his half-marathon personal best in Tempe, Arizona, in
2016, he faced a critical decision around 5 miles, where the lead pack he’d
been running in broke apart as top contenders Scott Bauhs and Karim El
Mabchour accelerated to a pace that felt a bit too quick for Ben. There were
two options: go with the pacesetters anyway and risk hitting the wall or
avoid this risk by holding back and giving up on any chance of winning. He
opted to roll the dice, and at 10 miles, he found himself not only still in
contention but feeling surprisingly strong, so he continued to press, chasing
Bauhs all the way to the finish line for second place.
--- PAGE 97 ---
This is one example of the sort of tactical pacing decision runners are
required to make all the time in workouts and, especially, in races. Over the
course of a longer event like a half-marathon, dozens of such decisions are
made, and they range from slowing down and tucking behind a taller athlete
while running into a headwind to disregarding a mile split that’s so far off
expectations as to suggest the possibility of measurement error.
It is beyond the scope of this book to offer comprehensive guidance on
how to handle every conceivable type of tactical pacing decision you might
encounter. Nor should you want such guidance. The goal is to become
confident in your own ability to handle tactical decisions, not to have these
decisions made for you!
In all seriousness, the tactical element of pacing is one of those things
that’s more learnable than teachable. By this I mean that intentional practice
will take you a lot further than an encyclopedia of if-then instructions from
me or any coach. For this reason, decision tracking is especially valuable in
its application to tactical pacing decisions. It doesn’t matter how bad your
tactical decision-making is today. By reviewing and grading your pacing
decisions routinely, you will become increasingly confident in the calls you
make in the heat of the moment. But what if you lack the confidence to
even distinguish good pacing decisions from bad ones? In this case,
consider working with a coach to build a base of knowledge for your
confidence to rest on.
Attentional Focus
The relevance of attentional focus to pacing is obvious. No runner has ever
paced a race or hard workout optimally by daydreaming their way through
it—at least not that I’m aware of.
There’s an almost infinite variety of things you can focus your attention
on when running, but all fall within a handful of broad categories. At the
most general level, your attention can be focused either externally or
internally. When focused externally, your attention can be directed toward
task-relevant stimuli, such as a big puddle on the trail ahead that you’ll
want to avoid splashing through, or non-task-relevant stimuli, such as a
squirrel scampering across a tree branch above you.
When focused inward, your attention may be directed toward thoughts,
emotions, body sensations, physiological processes including breathing, and
--- PAGE 98 ---
actions such as your step rate. These too may be either task relevant (an
example being assessing your thirst intensity) or non–task relevant (like
wondering how the Green Bay Packers are doing in their big showdown
against the Chicago Bears). An internal attentional focus may also be
metacognitive, meaning you’re thinking about what you’re thinking or
feeling, an example of which is assessing whether your current perceived
effort level is appropriate for the moment.
All of these examples of attentional focus may also be proactive or
reactive in nature. Proactive attention entails choosing its object, as when
you glance at your device to check the elapsed time, while reactive attention
entails responding to a stimulus, often involuntarily, as when you hear your
name shouted and glance to the right, where you see your cousin Sam
cheering you on.
Research has shown that certain uses of attentional focus tend to aid
performance, while others tend to hinder it. Broadly speaking, non-task-
relevant foci like thinking about what you’re going to eat after the race are
unhelpful. Sometimes you’ll hear disappointed elite runners chastise
themselves in post-race interviews for “losing focus.” Seldom are such
lapses as egregious as making mental shopping lists during competition, but
virtually any distraction from the task at hand will negatively affect pacing
and performance.
The mental trick known as chunking can be helpful in maintaining focus
during longer events, where staying focused is especially challenging.
Sports psychologist Noel Brick, whose research concentrates on how elite
endurance athletes use their minds during training and competition, defines
this trick as “mentally breaking down the distance to smaller segments.”
Thirty kilometers into a 50K ultramarathon, thinking about the finish line
may be overwhelming, but thinking about reaching the next aid station is
far less so.
The one circumstance in which dissociation, or intentionally not focusing
on the task at hand, can be beneficial is when a runner’s discomfort level
verges on intolerable. There’s a great example of helpful dissociation in
novelist Haruki Murakami’s memoir, What I Talk About When I Talk About
Running. While competing in his first ultramarathon, Murakami hit a rough
patch during which he tried every psychological trick he could think of to
keep running despite the overpowering desire he felt to stop. As a last-ditch
--- PAGE 99 ---
measure, he tried telling himself, “I’m not a human. I’m a piece of
machinery. I don’t need to feel a thing. I just forge on ahead.” To his
amazement, this self-admittedly unhinged internal pep talk worked.
Murakami did not literally turn into a machine, of course, nor did he
actually cease to feel a thing, but somehow the very repetition of this
thought enabled him to find a certain peace within his suffering and catch a
second wind. “My muscles silently accepted this exhaustion now as a
historical inevitability, an ineluctable outcome of the revolution,” he writes.
“I had been transformed into a being on autopilot, whose sole purpose was
to rhythmically swing his arms back and forth, move his legs forward one
step at a time.” In this trancelike state, Murakami found himself easily
passing the scores of runners who had passed him during his earlier rough
patch. “It’s weird, but at the end I hardly knew who I was or what I was
doing,” he reflects. “By then running had entered the realm of the
metaphysical. First there came the action of running, and accompanying it
there was this entity known as me. I run; therefore I am.”
As I say, though, except in emergencies, dissociation tends to harm
pacing and performance, as does thinking about or trying to control
physiological processes such as breathing. Focusing on your movements
can go either way. As a general rule, doing so is helpful when your attention
is directed toward the interface between your body and the environment or
on staying relaxed, whereas it’s unhelpful when it’s used to try to run
“correctly” in some way. In a study that Noel Brick did on mental processes
in elite runners during training and racing, self-reminders to relax were
among the most commonly cited metacognitive strategies.
Different situations demand different attentional foci, and studies
involving elite endurance athletes indicate that the highest performers are
adept at selecting the right focus for each moment. If you think about it, this
makes sense. In the early part of a marathon, for example, when you’re
feeling energized and excited, it might be best to pay extra attention to the
current pace reading on your device as a way to prevent overzealous pacing,
whereas in the late part of a marathon, it’s better to ignore your device
completely in favor of feeling your way to the limit and urging yourself
forward with positive self-talk.
Table 5.1. The do’s and don’ts of attentional focus in runs
--- PAGE 100 ---
Do Don’t
Think helpful thoughts
Stay focused on task-
relevant stimuli
Allow your main focus to
be context specific
Relax
Let your attention roam
among a few key foci
Allow negative thoughts and emotions to
go unchecked
Dissociate
Think about your breathing or other
automated physiological processes
Try to control your form
Fixate on one thing
At all times, though, your attention should roam. Whether you’re 2000
meters into a 10,000-meter track race or working your way through hill
repetition number 6 in a set of 10, you’ll get the best outcome if you shift
your attention from one object to another within a limited set of
perceptions, thoughts, and emotions. Pacing masters develop a natural
rhythm in their attention cycling, a sort of attentional loop that moves from
effort assessment to context-specific self-talk to pace checking and back to
effort assessment (for example), with allowances for reacting to salient
stimuli and changing the contents of the loop as the run unfolds.
The opposite of such tactical attentional roaming is fixation. Allowing
your mind to fixate on something is almost always harmful to pacing and
performance. Most often this occurs when a runner is experiencing a high
level of discomfort, which then dominates their attention in the way that
extreme pain does, but there are also many examples of runners fixating on
less threatening elements of their experience such as negative thoughts
(“I’m behind my goal pace”) or emotions (such as disappointment) or even
device data. At a press conference I attended after the 2010 Boston
Marathon, a reporter asked Ryan Hall why he’d looked at his watch so
frequently during the first mile of the race, which Hall had completed in
4:36. Hall explained that he had done it in an effort to keep himself in
--- PAGE 101 ---
check, having run the same mile in an absurdly quick 4:29 in his Boston
debut 2 years earlier. Not quite satisfied with this answer, the reporter
informed Hall that he’d glanced at his watch no fewer than 17 times in that
first mile.
“I guess that is a bit excessive,” Hall laughed.
So, hey, even the pros do it. But just as Ryan Hall (who, by the way,
finished third that day in 2:08:40) admitted to fixating too much on his
watch in the opening mile of the 2010 Boston Marathon, you, too, should
confess your errors in attentional focus in your training log while also
noting what you did right. Table 5.1 presents the basic dos and don’ts of
attentional focus during running, which you can use in making these
assessments. Note that they apply only in races and workouts where your
goal is to find or approach your limit. Different rules apply in easy runs,
which we will talk about in the next chapter.
Building Toughness
I am living proof that a runner doesn’t have to be born tough to become
tough. As a high school runner, my aversion to the pain of racing was so
extreme that I committed unforgivable acts of cowardice such as faking
injuries to escape it. When I got back into competitive running in my late
twenties—having quit years before to escape the pain of racing once and for
all—I was determined to exorcise the demons that sabotaged the first act of
my running life, which meant embracing the suffering I’d previously shied
away from. In this second act of my running life, the pain of racing was no
longer just a vitiating part of the experience but the very point of it. I
wanted not just to run well but to see myself as a tough person, and to this
end, I measured myself less by how quickly I ran than by how close I got to
my absolute limit in the effort to run quickly.
Success didn’t come overnight, but it did come. I will never forget the
moment when, minutes before the start of Ironman® Santa Rosa in 2019, I
realized that I couldn’t wait for the 10 hours of strain and pain that lay
ahead and that I was as calm as I would have been before an easy 6-mile
run on a random Tuesday. This state of mind could not have been more
different from my state of mind before my first Ironman in 2002, when my
last words (spoken to my brother Sean in response to the question, “How
--- PAGE 102 ---
are you feeling?”) before walking to the start line were, “I’m shitting my
pants.” And the new mind state was not only more pleasant to experience
but also more effective, as the older but tougher version of me completed
the Ironman distance 25 minutes faster than the younger but weaker version
of me.
The keys to my transformation were meaning and practice. Becoming
mentally tough was personally meaningful to me, so I worked hard at it.
Friedrich Nietzsche was right: “He who has a why to live for can bear
almost any how.” But meaning alone didn’t suffice to get the job done. I
needed to practice being tough, again and again, for many years, gaining a
bit of ground each time, like an actor overcoming stage fright not through
hypnosis or some other instantaneous cure but by getting back on stage
night after night.
According to science, mental toughness is 50 percent genetic, which
means it is also 50 percent nongenetic, and for those of us who weren’t born
tough, it is the desire to be tough that makes us tough. As the 18th-century
English poet Horace Smith put it, “Courage is the fear of being thought a
coward.” Again, Steve Prefontaine’s frequent use of the word guts comes to
mind. In one famous instance, Prefontaine said, “A lot of people run a race
to see who is the fastest. I run to see who has the most guts.” Regardless of
how many or how few toughness genes you were blessed with, only by
consciously prizing toughness—perhaps even making it the very point of
your racing at certain times—will you fully realize your potential for
toughness.
Again, though, it takes practice. One of the most consistent research
findings in this area is that, for all of us, mental toughness requires repeated
exposure to challenging and stressful situations that test our toughness. It
was on the basis of this finding that exercise scientist Lee Crust and
psychologist Peter Clough wrote in a 2011 article appearing in the Journal
of Sport Psychology in Action that “to develop mental toughness, young
athletes must be gradually exposed to, rather than shielded from,
demanding situations in training and competition in order to learn how to
cope.” I would only add that the same holds true for adult athletes.
Other experts in the field of mental toughness have developed systematic
methods for cultivating this trait in athletes. The two methods that I found
--- PAGE 103 ---
especially helpful in building my own mental fitness and have applied
successfully with athletes I coach are accountability cues and limit testers.
Accountability Cues
I’ve long been fascinated by codes, oaths, pledges, credos, and mantras. All
of these related tools are used, or can be used, to hold oneself accountable
to a certain standard of behavior. Through them, athletes and others
transform vague intentions into explicit rules, and therein lies their power.
In stressful situations, like when you’re struggling in a race and beginning
to doubt your ability to achieve your goal, it can be difficult to
spontaneously come up with a thought or a snippet of self-talk that delivers
just the right message to enable you to hang in there. Different from
positive self-talk, accountability cues are more corrective in nature, and
they obviate the problem of coming up with a way to stay on track by
allowing you to fall back on prepared words that represent the athlete you
want to be when the going gets tough.
It’s no accident that many elite runners and other top athletes who are
celebrated for their toughness have relied on accountability cues. For
former marathon world record holder Paula Radcliffe, it was “No limits.”
For 2:20 marathoner Sara Hall, it’s “The well is deep.” And for legendary
professional cyclist Jens Voigt, it was “Shut up, legs!” Such phrases
counteract the panic reflex that threatens to control our thoughts and actions
in difficult moments by providing an alternative reflex, not unlike how the
mnemonic “Stop, drop, and roll” has saved the lives of many a person
whose clothing’s caught on fire.
The options are endless: “Never give up.” “No excuses.” “Be brave.” The
more personal your chosen accountability cues are—the more they come
from the heart, in other words—the more effective they will be in holding
you to the standard you’ve set for yourself. My mantra for my second
Ironman was “Don’t panic,” a choice I made based on the fact that I had hit
the panic button more than once in my first Ironman and on the expectation
that I would face the same temptation again. Sure enough, I did, but the
words I had prepared in advance kept me from repeating the mistake I’d
made 17 years before.
With few exceptions, runners who truly, deeply want to be tough use
accountability cues in hard workouts and races. All runners engage in some
--- PAGE 104 ---
form of self-talk while running, but whereas in the minds of runners who
struggle with pacing, self-talk often takes the form of an unstructured
shouting match between base instincts and their best self, pacing masters
put their best self in charge before the battle even begins through
accountability cues.
Limit Testers
Training is more than a vehicle for building fitness. It is also a potential
vehicle for building toughness. Each run you do should have a specific
fitness-building purpose, but a select few workouts should be set aside for
the special purpose of suffering for suffering’s sake. I call these workouts
limit testers.
A well-designed limit tester subjects the runner to intense suffering but is
not so punishing that it does more harm than good physically. This balance
can be achieved through workout formats that require you to run as hard as
you can for short periods of time. There are two basic ways to run to your
limit, both of which were first discussed in Chapter 2: closed loops and
open loops. Closed-loop limit testers are runs or run segments with a
definite endpoint that are intended to be reached at a maximum effort.
Open-loop limit testers are runs that continue to the point of failure.
An example of a closed-loop limit tester is a set of six 1-mile repetitions
where the first five are run at a 10K pace and the last mile is completed as
fast as possible. Another example is long accelerations, in which runners
gradually accelerate from a jog to a full sprint over the course of several
minutes. An example of an open-loop limit tester is the Prefontaine, where
runners complete alternating 200 m segments at a 1-mile race pace and 1-
mile race pace plus 10 seconds per 200 m until they can no longer hold the
required paces. All of these limit testers are included in the training plans at
the back of this book and also in the library of workouts available at
https://www.8020endurance.com.
The ultimate limit tester, of course, is racing itself. Because racing is
highly taxing on the body, hence somewhat disruptive to the training
process, it must be done sparingly. But shorter races such as 1-mile track
events and 5K road events can be done at modest levels of fitness and
require less recovery time than longer competitions. It therefore encourages
athletes seeking to build toughness or reconnect with their toughness after a
--- PAGE 105 ---
prolonged layoff from racing to sprinkle their preparation for important
events with short races that serve mainly as limit testers. There’s simply no
better way to develop a feel for—and push back—one’s perceptual limit.
Limit testers in general build toughness in two ways. First, they increase
tolerance for the type of discomfort that is experienced in maximal running
efforts. This was demonstrated in a 2017 study led by Thomas O’Leary of
the UK Ministry of Defense, which found that subjects who completed
either 6 weeks of moderate-intensity training or 6 weeks of painful high-
intensity training experienced similar improvements in aerobic fitness, but
the latter group showed significantly more improvement in an open-loop
time-to-exhaustion test and a test of pain tolerance.
The second way in which limit testers increase mental toughness is by
enhancing self-efficacy. Runners who routinely make the choice to subject
themselves to intense discomfort in workouts come to see themselves
differently than those who do not. Specifically, they see themselves as being
capable of choosing to hurt in pursuit of their running goals. As runners
move toward pacing mastery, their running experience seems less and less
like something that is happening to them and more and more like something
they are making happen. Limit testers are another helpful contributor to this
wonderful feeling of sports mastery.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 106 ---
6
Pacing in Training
Mastering pacing is not about learning how to run completely by feel,
paying no attention to numbers. It’s about finding your limit, which requires
a fine calibration of subjective perceptions against objective measurements.
Running free does not mean running like a wild horse, by intuition alone. It
means knowing what you can do and then doing it. Pacing masters are
runners who know how they ought to be feeling 16.6 miles into a marathon,
or 12 seconds into their seventh out of ten 60-second hill repetitions, or
whatever. In other words, pacing masters aren’t just good at reading their
perceptions generally; they are good at reading their perceptions as they
relate to distance, time, and speed. The best way to develop pacing skill,
therefore, is to systematically train this specific ability.
In the preceding chapter, we looked at ways you can develop the key
mental traits that underlie pacing skill. Now it’s time to shift our focus to
the skill itself, discussing ways to improve pacing prowess by calibrating
perceptions against measurements. There are three methods that I have
found to be especially useful for this purpose: effort-based training, specific
repetition, and special pacing challenges.
Effort-Based Training
Effort-based training is just what it sounds like: pacing yourself without the
help of a device. It’s okay to wear a watch for the purposes of recording
data and knowing when to start and finish segments of a structured
workout, but in an effort-based run, you’re not taking any pacing cues from
your watch, relying instead on perceived effort to control your pace. The
important thing—whether you choose to leave your device at home or set
the display to show only non-pace-related data—is that you give yourself
no option to cheat. When runners complain that they’re just no good at
pacing by feel, it’s usually because they’ve never really tried, and they’ve
--- PAGE 107 ---
never really tried because they can cheat as often as they like by glancing at
their wrist. With effort-based training, cheating is not allowed, and it’s
amazing what a difference it makes for a lot of runners.
“I used to watch my heart rate like a hawk,” wrote one such runner on the
80/20 forum after I persuaded him to give the method a try. “It got to where
running wasn’t fun. So I altogether stopped looking at anything other than
time or distance on the easy runs, except for after the fact. Not even
worrying about power, pace, or heart rate. Just doing whatever feels easy.
It’s been liberating not worrying about those things. It feels like the effort is
always just right, and running is fun again.”
How to Measure Your Effort
In 1982, Swedish psychologist Gunnar Borg wrote a scientific paper in
which he claimed that perceived exertion (a.k.a. perceived effort) is “the
single best indicator of physical strain.” This claim was not well received
initially by the exercise scientists whose turf was infringed upon by this
claim, but today we know not only that Borg was right but also why he was
right. As I explained in Chapter 2, it is now established science that
perceived effort is the limiting factor in endurance performance. To feel you
have reached your limit is to have reached your limit, plain and simple. Not
every researcher who clings to the belief that heart rate or oxygen
consumption or blood lactate or something else biological is the best
indicator of physical strain has died off yet, but they are an endangered
species.
Take blood lactate. Suppose you complete a standard, high-intensity, run-
to-exhaustion test, at the end of which your blood lactate and perceived
effort levels are measured. You then go on a low-carb diet for 2 days and
repeat the same test. When you quit this second run to exhaustion, your
blood lactate level will be lower than it was the first time. That’s because
lactate production is affected by carbohydrate availability. But your
perceived effort will be unchanged from the first test. Which of these two
measures, then, is the more reliable indicator of your limit?
What distinguishes perceived effort from any physiological measure is
that it’s the only indicator of physical strain that comes straight from its true
source, which is the brain. All conscious experiences, including perceived
effort, emerge from brain activity. The hardest-working part of the brain
--- PAGE 108 ---
during running is the premotor cortex, whose job is to make the body do
what the mind wants it to. Brain imaging studies have shown that activity in
the premotor cortex tracks closely with perceived effort ratings. This tells us
that the primary determinant of how hard exercise feels at a given moment
is how hard the brain is working to drive the muscles. Activity in the
premotor cortex can be thought of as the brain giving the body a verbal
command to move. When that voice is whispering “move,” running feels
quite easy, and when it’s screaming “MOVE!” running feels extremely
hard.
If the name Gunnar Borg rings a bell, by the way, it’s because you’re
familiar with the Borg scale of perceived exertion, which went from 6 to 20
originally but has been modified (thankfully) to go from 1 to 10. And if
Borg’s name doesn’t ring a bell, you might remember the three-letter
sequence RPE, which stands for rate of perceived exertion and represents
the Borg scale’s units. Borg created the scale to serve as a way both to test
his belief that effort perceptions are the best indicator of physical strain and
to monitor and prescribe intensity. This work has continued beyond Borg’s
own lifetime, and what it has revealed is that runners have no trouble rating
their current overall effort on a 1-to-10 scale and that these ratings correlate
well with measures of physiological intensity. The consensus today is that,
as researchers at Munich Technical University put it in an article appearing
in the European Journal of Applied Physiology, “Borg’s RPE seems to be
an affordable, practical and valid tool for monitoring and prescribing
exercise intensity, independent of gender, age, exercise modality, physical
activity level and [cardiovascular disease] status.”
There’s only one problem. Scientific studies report average results, which
tend to gloss over individual differences. And you’d best believe there are
individual differences in perceived effort ratings. I remember reading that
when American professional runner and 2:20 marathoner Jordan Hasay was
returning to training from an injury, her orthopedist asked her to report her
pain level on a 1–10 scale after each run, but he soon abandoned the
practice in exasperation when it became clear that Hasay would never rate
any pain above a 2. She could be attacked by a swarm of killer bees and still
would report level 2 pain, maybe level 1. Similarly, I have observed that not
every runner has the same idea of 2 RPE, or 5, or 7, or 10. Some attempt at
standardizing the modified Borg scale must be made to ensure that all
--- PAGE 109 ---
runners do more or less the same thing when asked to run for 15 minutes at
an RPE of 6 or whatever.
The standardized version of the RPE scale that I use with runners was
created through a simple process that involved translating the objective,
physiological performance targets I normally use to prescribe intensity into
perceived effort ratings. A small amount of fudging was required, but that’s
okay. There’s no less fudging involved in intensity targets based on lab
testing, which seldom yields the same results twice. So it’s no big deal if
your RPE marker for a particular physiological threshold is inexact. The
only precision that is truly important in running is the ability to find your
real limit in competition, and that’s exactly what we’re aiming for here.
Physiological Anchors
The primary physiological anchor point of my perceived-effort scale (see
Table 6.1) is the first ventilatory threshold (VT1), which is associated with
an RPE of 4. This threshold is important because most runners unwittingly
do most of their supposed easy running slightly above it, whereas studies
have shown that improvements in fitness and performance are greatest
when the VT1 is never exceeded in easy runs and other runs intended to
target low intensity. The VT1 also happens to correspond to the highest
intensity at which a runner can close their mouth and breathe through their
nose indefinitely. Play around with nose-breathing at different paces until
you find the fastest pace you can sustain without the urge to open your
mouth and assign an RPE of 4 to it.
The other thresholds are less important with respect to their potential
consequences on your fitness development but are nevertheless useful, as
they relate to the objective of getting runners on the same page. Your
functional lactate threshold (LT) is the highest intensity you could sustain
for about 60 minutes in a race. The RPE associated with this intensity is 6.
Next comes critical velocity (CV), which is the highest speed at which your
body can maintain a relatively stable metabolic state and is sustainable for
20 to 30 minutes, depending on the individual. That might seem like a large
range, but in pace terms, we’re talking about a few seconds per mile, so
minimal fudging is required to associate a one-size-fits-all RPE of 7 with
CV. Finally, your maximal aerobic speed (MAS) is the lowest running
--- PAGE 110 ---
speed at which your body will max out its capacity to utilize oxygen. In
functional terms, this threshold is sustainable for 6 minutes, give or take,
regardless of fitness level (though the velocity itself increases with fitness),
and it gets an initial RPE of 8.
Table 6.1. Standardized RPE-based intensity scale
RPE Physiological Correlate Time Limit
1 --- Indefinite
2 --- Indefinite
3 --- Indefinite
4 First ventilatory threshold (VT1) 5:00:00
5 Steady state 2:00:00
6 Lactate threshold (LT) 1:00:00
7 Critical velocity (CV) 20:00–30:00
8 Maximal aerobic speed (MAS) 6:00
9 --- 1:00–5:00
10 Maximal velocity 0:30
Everything else is filler. Warm-ups, cooldowns, and active recoveries are
tagged with an RPE of 3. This is an effort level you feel you could sustain
almost indefinitely on fresh legs. Lower RPEs—specifically 1 and 2—are
--- PAGE 111 ---
never targeted in training. Reserve them for walking the dog and climbing
the stairs in your home. A 5 RPE correlates roughly with steady-state pace,
which is a pace you could sustain for 2 hours or perhaps a bit longer. A 10
RPE is a true maximal effort that cannot be sustained longer than 30
seconds. This leaves RPE 9 to cover everything from a 1-minute max effort
to a 5-minute max effort, approximately.
The Fine Print
Effort-based training involves a bit more than strict adherence to this 10-
point scale. The first thing you need to understand if you’re going to train
effectively by perceived effort is that RPE increases over time at any fixed
intensity. Heck, if you walk long enough, your RPE will reach 10
eventually. Hence the RPE assigned to any particular run segment is always
an initial rating that serves to set the intensity and is expected to increase as
you go, even as the physiological intensity remains constant. In other
words, for prescriptive purposes, RPE assumes no prior fatigue. This means
that if I ask you to run 12 × 1:00 at RPE 9 with 2:00 active recoveries at
RPE 3, your pace for both the intervals and the recoveries should stay the
same throughout the workout even though, realistically, by the time you
reach the tenth rep, you’d probably have to walk the recoveries to get your
RPE down to 3, and when you start the next rep, your RPE will rise above 9
very quickly. It’s just a matter of linking each RPE number to a specific
pace or intensity that is fixed for the rest of the run.
More generally, there’s room for interpretation, contextualization, and
common sense in using the 10-point scale. For example, if I asked you to
complete an interval set comprising 6 × 2:00 at RPE 8, and on another
occasion, I asked you to run 4 × 3:00 at RPE 8, you can and should exploit
the fact that this RPE value, like the others in the scale, represents a narrow
range, not a point, and run the longer intervals slightly slower than the
shorter ones.
Effort-based training does not require you to completely tune out
objective performance metrics (i.e., pace and run power). For the most part,
you should completely ignore such metrics during RPE-guided runs, but it’s
okay and even advisable oftentimes to look at your pace and/or power data
afterward. This can help you assess your pacing performance and document
your progress toward pacing mastery. I’ll give you a specific example of
--- PAGE 112 ---
how to conduct this sort of post hoc analysis when I discuss long
accelerations later in the chapter.
Finally, although it is possible to train effectively for races with RPE-
based runs exclusively, I don’t believe it’s the most effective way to develop
pacing skill. There’s something to be said for training by pace or power in
select workouts where the aim is to exercise precise control over pace.
Indeed, such workouts do more than any other to calibrate subjective effort
perception to objective reality. And when you feel you’ve achieved a
sufficient level of pacing mastery, you can go back to using pace- or power-
based training generally. The only run type that should always be done by
perceived effort, in my view, is easy runs. This is because easy runs account
for the bulk of any sensible runner’s training time, and allowing your pace
to fluctuate from day to day based on how you feel is a simple way to fine-
tune your training load as you go. Affording yourself this latitude will help
you avoid having to make the bigger adjustments to your plan that often
result when runners don’t listen to their bodies.
Specific Repetition
The training style of Japan’s elite runners is rather monotonous by the
standards of some runners from other places. Pro runners everywhere run a
lot, but the Japanese tend to run more than their counterparts in the rest of
the world. Australian runner Melissa Duncan wasn’t aware of this when she
joined the Tokyo-based Shiseido Running Club in 2019, and she got a rude
awakening in her first team meeting, where she learned that she and her
new teammates would be running three times the next day—and the day
after that, and the day after that, up to 200 km (160 miles) per week all told.
In addition to running a lot, Japanese elite runners have a predilection for
loop courses. Boston Marathon winner Toshihiko Seko took this approach
to an extreme in his 1980s heyday, doing most of his runs—including long
runs of up to 40 km—around a 1.3-km loop. That was 40 years ago, but a
milder form of the practice remains common today. Japan’s top runners
tend to cycle through a limited variety of workouts over and over, as the
world was reminded when Hitomi Niiya’s training log was posted online
after she set a national record of 1:06:38 in the 2020 Houston Half
Marathon. Those who took the time to scroll through the schedule saw a
--- PAGE 113 ---
small handful of workout types, most notably 400-meter and 1000-meter
intervals, repeated again and again. A few workouts of other types (hill
repetitions, steady-state runs) are mixed in there, but not many.
Japanese-born running coach Nobby Hashizume once explained to me
that the emphasis on repetition in the training of his native country’s elite
runners comes from the predominance of ekidens (team relay road races) in
their running culture. Tactical head-to-head racing plays a very small role in
these competitions, while steady solo pacing plays a very large role, for
which a highly repetitive style of training serves as excellent preparation.
It’s easy to see why. When you do certain types of workouts repeatedly, you
get to know them intimately, becoming sensitive to ever-finer details of the
experience, which enables you to execute the pacing element of the
workout with ever-increasing confidence and competence. What’s more,
this newfound pacing efficacy is to some extent generalizable to the rest of
your running. It’s sort of like how taking a deep dive into a certain musical
artist makes you better at listening to all music.
Additional benefits come from comparing your performance in often-
repeated workouts against your performance in races. Over time, these
workouts become benchmarks that enable you to set appropriate goals and
realistic expectations for races. It doesn’t particularly matter which specific
workouts you use for this purpose. All that matters is that you do enough of
them in the lead-up to a race of a given distance to know how your
performance in them correlates to race performance. You’re simply doing
the workouts, noting your times, racing, and then comparing after the fact,
so that the same workouts have predictive value when you do them in the
future. In the case of Hitomi Niiya, what she did in bread-and-butter
workouts like 400-meter and 1000-meter repeats told her what she could do
in her half-marathon, but both the workouts and the race distance could
have been different and her use of specific repetition would have had the
same effect.
Simplicity is a virtue in such runs. A very basic workout structure
facilitates both the process of familiarization and apples-to-apples
comparisons between runs of the same type. So much has been written and
said about training for running over the decades that those of us who write
and speak publicly on the topic feel a certain pressure to create novelty
(“Here’s an exotic workout you’ve never seen before!”). An unintended
--- PAGE 114 ---
consequence of such novelty bias is that it causes runners to lose sight of
the value of straightforward workouts such as 12 × 300 meters at a 3000-
meter race effort.
Naturally, the workouts you choose to repeat most regularly need to have
some relevance to the race you’re training for in terms of their fitness
benefits. A 4-hour long run is not the best choice for specific repetition if
you’re training for a 1500-meter track race, nor is a set of 100-meter sprints
the ideal bread-and-butter workout to use in preparing for a 100-mile trail
ultramarathon. The specific pace you target in such workouts should at least
fall within shouting distance of race pace. You need not—and in fact should
not—limit yourself to just one workout type, though. You’ll get that much
more out of your use of specific repetition if, like Niiya, you choose at least
a couple of workout types, perhaps one targeting an intensity that’s faster
than race pace for your upcoming event and another targeting an intensity
that’s about equal to or slightly slower than race pace.
Also, the workouts you use for the purpose of specific repetition should
not be identical each time you do them. Instead they should gradually
become more challenging so that they keep pushing your fitness level
upward. For example, you might start a sequence with 4 × 4:00 at critical
velocity, advance to 5 × 4:00 the next time, and add a sixth rep in the third
and final workout of the sequence. Note that all of the training plans
presented in Chapters 9 through 12 include sequences of bread-and-butter
workouts chosen in accordance with the principle of specific repetition.
Special Pacing Challenges
Picture a contest for runners that has the following design: Each contestant
stands alone with a “guide” at the start line of a half-marathon. The guide
goes first, beginning to make her way through the course at a steady pace
that is unspecified, except that the contestant she’s partnered with knows
it’s slower than his own half-marathon race pace. The moment the guide
reaches the course’s first turn and disappears from sight, the contestant is
allowed to start.
His goal is to catch the guide as close to the finish line as possible. Hence
the challenge the contestant is faced with is judging the guide’s pace in the
first 30 or 60 seconds she’s visible, considering the distance to be covered,
--- PAGE 115 ---
and choosing a pace that’s just enough faster than the guide’s to close the
gap over precisely 13.11 miles. The wrinkle is that the contestant’s
performance is judged not only by how close to the finish line the catch
occurs but also by how even his 1 km split times are throughout the chase,
so contestants can’t just game the system by closing the distance as quickly
as possible and then shadowing the guide until the very end.
It’s a wacky format yet straightforward enough to function as a pure test
of pacing skill. If 100 different contestants were to complete the challenge
on five separate occasions on different courses and with a new guide each
time, some would consistently achieve top scores, while others would
perform relatively poorly with equal consistency. And you can bet that the
top runners would be the same runners who succeeded best in finding their
limit in normal races because when you’re good at pacing, you’re good at
pacing. If you’re adept at pacing routine workouts and normal races, you’re
likely to be adept (at least in relation to other runners) at executing novel
tests of pacing ability and vice versa.
In the previous section, I made an analogy between developing pacing
skill and cultivating an ear for music. My point was that repeated exposure
to any particular kind of experience leads to more nuanced perceptions of it,
which in turn lead to greater control. But there’s just as much to be said for
throwing curveballs at perception. In reality, no runner ever truly runs the
same race or workout twice. In small ways, at least, each running
experience is unique, and for this reason, it takes a certain kind of mental
agility to pace well with consistency. Special pacing challenges are
designed to improve this aspect of pacing skill.
I must confess that I quite like the half-marathon tracking game I came
up with, but it’s not terribly practical. Fortunately, there are plenty of other
special pacing challenges that can be done anywhere at any time without
outside help while also conferring the fitness benefits one seeks in regular
workouts. The following are short descriptions of a handful of such formats
I’ve collected and invented over the years, all of which are included in the
training plans presented in Chapters 9 through 12. Feel free to create your
own special pacing challenges—the options are endless, and the whole idea
is to keep challenging your pacing skill with the unfamiliar.
Precision Splitting
--- PAGE 116 ---
These workouts develop your ability to hit the same time—down to the
hundredth of a second, if possible—in each interval of a set such as 8 × 400
m or 6 × 800 m. There are two ways to go about it. One is to pick an
appropriate target time before the workout and aim to nail it perfectly from
start to finish. The other option is to run the first interval by feel, capture
your time, and then try to hit the same time in every subsequent rep.
Obviously, this is not a challenge that works for time-based intervals, and
I do prefer time-based intervals generally because they are one-size-fits-all.
A set of 2-minute intervals at maximal aerobic speed is equally challenging
for fast and slow runners alike because both are able to sustain this speed
for about 6 minutes straight. But a set of 600 m intervals at MAS is
significantly more challenging for slower runners because it takes them
longer to cover that distance, so they’re coming closer to their limit in each
interval. To get a pacing challenge similar to that of precision intervals in a
time-based workout, try stretch intervals instead.
Stretch Intervals
This pacing challenge is made up of intervals of a uniform duration in
which you aim to cover slightly more distance each time. For example, you
might run 10 × 30 seconds uphill, completing the last rep at maximal effort
and each preceding rep just a hair slower. The challenge here is to run the
first rep at a high effort level that leaves just enough space for nine
subsequent increases in speed. To execute this type of workout properly,
you will need some way of marking the endpoint of each interval. I like to
use brightly colored socks, dropping one at the finish of the first rep,
dropping the other at the end of the second rep, retrieving the first on my
way back to the starting point for interval number three, and so forth.
Stretch intervals improve pacing skill by challenging you to perceive tiny
differences in speed and effort and to regulate your speed and effort with a
higher degree of precision than you are accustomed to doing. Most runners
find stretch intervals difficult both physically and mentally yet also fun.
Fast-Finish Long Runs
There’s a rule I sometimes impose on runners who have a tendency to fade
toward the end of long runs. It’s called the fastest-mile-last rule, and it
--- PAGE 117 ---
works just the way it sounds: The runner is required to complete the last
mile (or kilometer) of the run faster than any preceding mile. It’s a simple
way to encourage runners to be more mindful in their pacing from the
outset, making sure they save enough energy to speed up in the
homestretch. A majority of the training plans at the back of this book
feature time-based long runs with a 5-minute fast finish, but it’s the same
idea and offers the same benefit.
Mind you, a perfectly executed fast finish is not an all-out effort that
leaves you dry heaving at the foot of your driveway but a gentle push
resulting in a split time that’s a few ticks quicker than the next quickest
segment of the run. Practicing this method habitually will train your mind to
think ahead in all of your runs, including races, as pacing masters do.
Long Accelerations
Go out and run for 3 minutes, 6 minutes, or 11 minutes, accelerating
continuously the entire time without consulting your watch. This is
theoretically doable, as acceleration is something every runner can feel. In
fact, accelerating continuously for much shorter periods—say, 10 to 20
seconds—is quite easy. But drawing out a continuous acceleration over
several minutes demands a high degree of body attunement and nuanced
pace control, and that’s what makes long accelerations a terrific special
pacing challenge.
In the preceding chapter, long accelerations were presented as a tool for
building toughness. And they are that. But they’re even more mentally
taxing than they are physically challenging, as any runner who’s done them
can attest. The most common mistake made in executing long accelerations
is speeding up too quickly, which results in an “Oh, shit” moment when the
runner realizes that, with time still on the clock, they’ve run out of gears. I
call this pacing yourself into a corner. The limit comes more suddenly than
most first-timers anticipate. So don’t think about accelerating per se. That’s
too black and white. Think about accelerating as slowly as possible—so
slowly that it’s hard to tell sometimes whether you’re truly speeding up or
you’re making the second-most common error in executing long
accelerations, which is plateauing in pace or even slowing down a bit at
various points along the way.
--- PAGE 118 ---
Although you are forbidden to monitor your pace when doing a long
acceleration, you should record your workout data so you can look at it later
and judge your performance. Focus on the pace curve. It should be gently
upward sloping from end to end. The likelihood of this happening will be
greater if you run your accelerations on a flat route. If you run with a power
meter, an undulating route will serve the purpose. In this case, your power
curve will give you a better indication than the pace of how you performed.
Relaxed Time Trial
Here’s how to do a relaxed time trial: Warm up and then run 5 km or 10 km
at a 95 percent effort, aiming to cover the distance 5 percent slower than
you would in a race. I started doing relaxed time trials many years ago
because they seemed like a good way to sharpen up, build confidence, and
dial in my time goal for an upcoming race of the same distance, but I’ve
since come to appreciate relaxed time trials as a special pacing challenge.
The ideal time to do a relaxed time trial is about 2 weeks before a race of
the same distance. Your performance is judged by the time delta between
the two. If it’s exactly 5 percent, you get a lollipop. I’ve done enough
relaxed time trials that I’ve gotten quite good at them. In my last one, I
covered 10 km in 35:08. A couple of weeks later, I ran a 10 km virtual race
(this was during the COVID-19 pandemic, so there were no real races to
run) in 33:25, which is 4.9 percent faster!
The 5K and 10K distances work best for relaxed time trials because they
are long enough to constitute workouts unto themselves but not so long as
to leave you worn out and beaten up for 2 or 3 days afterward. I myself
have actually done full marathons as relaxed time trials.
Mini Intervals
Few pacing errors annoy me more than that of automatically tuning one’s
effort to the interval duration regardless of what the workout description
calls for. I’ll prescribe 5 × 3:00 at 5K race pace, and the runner will simply
ignore the pace target and run the intervals as fast as they can without
cratering.
“What’s the big deal?” you ask. After all, they’re still getting a good
workout. The big deal is that skillful pacing is all about control, and when
--- PAGE 119 ---
athletes are allowed to do everything by reflex, they don’t learn control. It’s
not the noncompliance that bugs me when runners mindlessly tune their
effort to interval duration but the mindlessness itself and its consequences.
Mini intervals are a tool I use to break this habit. An example is 60 × 30
seconds on, 30 seconds off, where the “on” segments are run at lactate
threshold pace and the “off” segments are run at VT1 pace. The brevity of
the intervals tempts runners to go much faster than the prescribed pace, but
if they do, they’ll pay dearly (and deservedly!) after 20 repetitions, when
they’ve still got 40 left. Mini intervals all but force runners to make a good-
faith effort at compliance, thereby training them in mindful control of pace.
After completing them, analyze the data, and judge your performance by
the consistency of your pace and how close you got to LT pace in the “on”
segments.
Don’t Forget to Have Fun!
The biggest misstep that I made when I started to teach pacing skill to
runners in a programmatic way was unintentionally making some of them
feel like every run was a test of some kind. That’s no fun, and it had a
negative effect on the overall motivation and enjoyment levels of some.
We must never allow our pacing work to spoil the fun of training. As
important as it is to be conscious of pace in certain runs that are earmarked
for pacing skill development, it’s equally important to relegate pacing to the
back of your mind in other runs. Pacing skill development is meant to be a
project, not an obsession. And the overall process should be rewarding, not
frustrating, to which end I urge the runners I work with—and you—to focus
on the progress that’s being made rather than on how far away pacing
mastery seems. You can’t run free if your running is in any way a burden.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 120 ---
7
Pacing in Competition
There’s a reason I define pacing as the art of finding your limit. More than a
few great runners over the years have viewed their races as works of art.
Steve Prefontaine (once again) was one such runner, who, while still
competing for the University of Oregon, said, “Some people create with
words or with music or with a brush and paints. I like to make something
beautiful when I run.”
It’s no accident that the word performance is used to refer to what
musicians, actors, and other artists do on stage as well as to what runners do
in races. For performing artists, there is no amount of rehearsal that
guarantees a successful performance before a live audience. It isn’t just that
they might forget a line or break a string. It’s also that, even if everything
goes according to script, the performance could be better or worse based on
other factors, such as how they’re feeling about what they’re doing. The
greatest performers embrace this uncertainty, relishing the high-stakes
nature of performance. They don’t want guarantees.
Alas, the same cannot be said of many runners, particularly those who
struggle with pacing. Lacking confidence in their ability to solve the unique
puzzle that each race presents, these runners would gladly accept an
alternate reality in which, if they just did all the necessary work to prepare
for a great performance, the performance itself would be automatic. It’s a
vain wish, however. To find your limit in any given race, you must
improvise, working with what you’ve got that day to feel your way to an
outcome that remains undetermined until the moment it happens. Granted,
this does mean you have no one but yourself to blame if you blow it. But it
also means you get all the credit if you nail it!
Wouldn’t you like to create something beautiful when you run? Of course
you would. And the only way to do so is to embrace the racing experience
as the live solo act that it is. It’s like tangoing before a panel of surly judges
with a competitive dance partner you’ve only just met. The many past
--- PAGE 121 ---
tangos you’ve done with other partners will give you a chance to score
perfect 10s, but this will only happen if you’re able to quickly and
effectively read your partner and cooperate with them to create a
performance that looks rehearsed. Think of each race you do as a new dance
partner, and think of those perfect 10s as your personal performance limit
on that day.
A good example of what this looks like in the real world comes from
Sarah Crouch, an elite runner with whom I did some training during my
summer in Flagstaff with NAZ Elite. The following May, Sarah flew to
Grand Rapids to race in the 2018 USATF 25K Championships. Her last
several competitive outings had been disappointing, and 4 long years had
passed since Sarah set a personal best at any distance. Something had to
change, and on the eve of the event, Sarah announced that she would
compete “naked,” sans watch, which is not unheard of at the professional
level (Galen Rupp left his watch at home when he won the 2020 Olympic
Trials Marathon) but was unusual for her. Sarah explained her reasoning as
follows in a pre-race interview for FloTrack: “I feel that when I’m wearing
a watch I’m constantly looking at it. I’m far too much in my own head. So
the goal tomorrow is to race just by instinct, and guts.”
Intrigued by the experiment, I tuned in to FloTrack’s live coverage the
next morning. From the moment Sarah first appeared on my computer
screen, I knew something special was in the works. She seemed like a
different person than the one I had run with less than a year before, running
with a striking combination of aggression and serenity, her eyes focused
seemingly miles up the road as she dragged eight-time national champion
Aliphine Tuliamuk behind her. Incredibly, Sarah passed the half-marathon
mark in 1:12:45, just 35 seconds shy of her 4-year-old personal best for that
distance, and went on to finish the race in third place. It was a breakthrough
performance—Sarah’s first podium finish in a national championship race
and a huge improvement on her recent racing.
The lesson here is not that runners should never wear watches when they
race. In fact, there is no lesson, but through Sarah’s story, you can see
what’s possible when a runner fully accepts the performative nature of
racing and allows today’s limit to guide her to it. Sarah Crouch wasn’t just
satisfied with her performance in Grand Rapids; she was ecstatically proud
of it, and duly so, because she had created it from nothing.
--- PAGE 122 ---
I want you to be ecstatically proud of your future races, and to that end, I
will devote this chapter to sharing my best advice for pacing in competition.
The three most common errors in race pacing are (1) bad planning (or not
having a plan), (2) not sticking to the plan, and (3) sticking too much to the
plan. I’ll show you how to avoid each of these errors by applying the
principles and methods of optimal pacing I’ve taught you to each unique
race experience to create the best possible performance. We will then wrap
up by addressing the important difference between racing for time and
racing to beat other runners.
Bad Planning or No Plan
Jim Walmsley came into the 2018 Ultra-trail du Mont Blanc (UTMB) in
France with big ambitions. Having recently smashed the course record at
the Western States 100, Jim wanted to apply the same winning formula at
the 106-mile UTMB (where he’d finished fifth in his debut the year before),
coming out hot and cooking the competition early. Alas, he cooked himself
instead, dropping out at 75 miles.
“I like to think I’m more willing to push into a pace with an unknown
outcome,” he told Runner’s World writer Amanda Loudin afterward. “It’s
both a strength and a weakness, but I feel it sets me up to surprise myself
and do things I may not have otherwise thought possible. It can also set me
up for a long, hard day with the lowest of lows, too. I love running this way
and it’s what inspires me to train for these races on the biggest stage.”
These words sound like those of a clear-eyed competitor who has no
regrets and is not about to change his ways. But after flaming out again at
UTMB in 2021 and finishing a disappointing fourth in 2022 after once
more setting the pace in the early going, Jim decided that a new approach
was needed. The problem, he realized, was his refusal to take the race on its
terms, insisting instead on dictating the terms and expecting the formula
that worked everywhere else to work at an event that, with its severe terrain
and unparalleled level of competition, wasn’t like other events. Step one
was a full-time relocation to France, where Jim spent countless runs
familiarizing himself with the race course. When race day came, he turned
his default strategy on its head, going so far as to start the race several rows
from the front to keep himself from getting carried away. With “patience”
--- PAGE 123 ---
as his mantra, Jim allowed himself to fall 9 minutes behind the leader
before clawing his way back, taking the lead for the first time at 59 miles
and going on to win in 19:37:43, one of the fastest times in the 21-year
history of the event.
The lesson of the story is this: When you start a race, you need to have a
plan—and not just a plan but a good one. Jim Walmsley’s original plan to
win UTMB the same way he won other races was bad because it failed to
take due consideration of the event’s uniqueness. Only when he developed a
new plan that factored in his strengths and weaknesses as well as the
realities of the event did he break through and win in his fifth attempt.
I realize that most runners aren’t trying to win major ultramarathons, but
the same planning rules apply to more modest performance goals like
beating your own best time in the annual Independence Day 5K road race.
The following five rules will help you avoid experiencing the kind of regret
Walmsley did.
Consider Pace First, Time Second
The time goals that runners set for races are often somewhat arbitrary.
Round numbers in particular exert a pull that causes many to overreach. So,
for example, a runner who thinks they’re able to run a 5K in about 21
minutes sets a goal to run 20 minutes, and a runner who feels they’re in
3:04 marathon shape sets a goal to break 3 hours. I’m oversimplifying a bit
to make a point, but you get the idea.
There’s nothing wrong with a 21-minute 5K runner dreaming of running
a 20-minute 5K or with a 3:04 marathoner wanting to run a sub-3-hour
marathon eventually. The problem is that a runner who’s in 21-minute 5K
shape today and starts a 5K at a 20-minute pace is likely to finish in 22
minutes, and a runner who’s ready to run a 3:04 marathon today and starts
out on pace to run 2:59 is likely to finish in 3:14—or not at all. If you want
to find your limit in your next race, your goal should be based on a clear-
eyed reading of your current ability. This requires that you forget about
round numbers—and indeed about finish times in general—for the moment
and instead focus on pace. Ask yourself what the fastest pace is that you
could sustain for the full distance of your upcoming race, and then use your
answer to project a finish time. It’s a small difference in orientation, but it’s
far more likely to yield a goal that represents your present limit.
--- PAGE 124 ---
If you’re currently the round-number type of goal setter, chances are you
haven’t put much thought into the process by which you set goals. A certain
number just sort of pops into your head a couple of weeks before the race,
and it feels about right, so that’s your goal. Pace-based goal-setting, by
contrast, is infused throughout the entire training process. Day by day, you
ask yourself, “What is this run telling me about the fastest pace I could
sustain for the full distance of my upcoming race?” As a result, by the time
you settle on a final goal, the number you pick has a solid basis. Benchmark
workouts are especially helpful in this regard.
Use Benchmark Workouts to Refine Your Goal
As I mentioned in Chapter 6, any run you do can tell you something about
your current fitness, but certain workouts tell you more, especially as they
relate to an upcoming race. To fulfill their purpose, such benchmark
workouts need to have some relevance to the race they precede, and they
must also be familiar enough from prior experience to provide a basis for
comparisons. Obviously, it helps if the race distance you’re targeting is
itself at least somewhat familiar as well.
For example, long runs containing extended efforts at anticipated
marathon race pace (e.g., 10 miles easy plus 10 miles at marathon pace) are
commonly used as a benchmark workout prior to marathon competition.
These workouts are challenging enough that they shouldn’t be done very
often, but even one big marathon-pace workout done before a marathon will
give the runner who does it something to go on when interpreting the results
of the next big marathon-pace run performed ahead of a second marathon.
Here are examples of useful benchmark workouts for other popular race
distances:
5K: 5 × 1K at estimated 5K race pace / 400 m jog recovery
10K: 6 × 1 mile at estimated 10K race pace / 400 m jog recovery
Half-marathon: 3 × 3 miles (or 5K) at estimated half-marathon
pace / 1:00 rest
Marathon: 10 miles easy, 10 miles at estimated marathon pace
--- PAGE 125 ---
Benchmark workouts don’t have to be done at your estimated current
pace for a particular race distance. The 5K workout above could serve just
as well as a benchmark workout for a 10K race if you’ve done enough of
both. Interval workouts targeting maximal aerobic speed have been used
with good success as performance benchmarks for 5K races, as have runs
focused on critical velocity by runners training for 10Ks and half-
marathons. And don’t forget about relaxed time trials, as discussed in
Chapter 6. The two main criteria for all such runs are relevance and
familiarity. Any run becomes familiar with repetition, of course, and
relevance is broadly defined in running. Even milers need stamina, and
even marathoners need speed.
Aim for Incremental Improvements
In 2007, Haile Gebrselassie set a new world record of 2:04:26 in winning
the Berlin Marathon. The first thing he said after crossing the finish line
was, “I can run faster.” The following year, Geb returned to Berlin and
bettered his mark, running 2:03:58—a hair more than 1 second per mile
faster than last time.
As this example illustrates, it’s easier to know you can go faster than it is
to know how fast you can go. In fact, it’s infinitely easier, as it is simply
impossible for any runner to know how fast they can ultimately go at any
race distance. So instead of setting goals based on your best guess as to how
fast you can go, just aim for incremental improvement. If, for example,
you’ve run three half-marathons and your best and most recent time was
1:44:14, use this number as a baseline for setting your next goal. If your
current training suggests you’re ready to make a small step forward, then
shoot to lower your mark by 1 to 2 seconds per mile. If you’ve experienced
a breakthrough in fitness since your last half, set the bar a little higher.
You don’t always have to be fitter to seek incremental improvements.
Haile Gebrselassie wasn’t any fitter when he set his second marathon world
record at age 36 than he was when he set his first one the year before. He
just had the advantage of having already run a marathon in 2:04:26, which
gave him a solid basis for believing he could squeeze a few more seconds
out of himself. The beauty of incremental improvement is that repetition
works magic, enabling runners to go faster even after they’ve stopped
--- PAGE 126 ---
getting “better,” coaxing them through the last few purely mental steps
toward their ultimate limit.
The weakness of the incremental-improvement approach is that it
demands patience, and it assumes you’ll have many bites at the same apple
—whether it’s half-marathons or anything else. But what if your next race is
at a distance you’ve never done, or you specialize in 100-milers, where you
only get so many bites at the apple? In these cases, the incremental-
improvements approach won’t be as useful. Simple as that.
Consider the Course and Conditions
Jim Walmsley is hardly alone in having failed to properly account for
course conditions in setting and pursuing a race time goal. Too many
runners set goals that assume an easy course and favorable conditions and
then apply that goal to an event that has a less-than-easy course and is likely
to take place in less-than-perfect conditions. There’s nothing wrong with
using a “perfect world” scenario as your starting point in the goal-setting
process, but this number should be treated as just that: a starting point that
is subject to future modification based on specific discrepancies
(topography, terrain, winds, temperature and humidity, and elevation, in
particular) between a perfect world and the one you’ll be racing in.
When cyclist Bradley Wiggins broke the world record for the 1-hour time
trial at a London velodrome in 2015, he adjusted his goal from 16.1 seconds
per lap to 16.4 seconds per lap at the last moment based on an unexpectedly
high barometric pressure reading. A solo cycling time trial performed in a
velodrome is a sufficiently controlled experiment that such precision is
possible, whereas in most running events, there’s a little more guesswork
involved. Tools such as the Run S.M.A.R.T. Project’s running calculator
and Stryd’s race prediction feature can help you quantify the anticipated
effect of weather and elevation gain on your race pace. Accounting
mathematically for other factors, such as strong winds and muddy trails, is
more difficult. The runners who do the best job of adjusting their pace to
unfavorable conditions of all kinds seldom bother with calculators. Instead
they simply start their races with a general expectation of running slower
than normal and then feel their way to the appropriate pace as they go.
“How is this done?” you ask. It’s done the same way good pacing is
always done. Runners who succeed in finding their limit despite
--- PAGE 127 ---
unfavorable conditions take the race on its own terms, asking themselves
throughout it, “Can I sustain this effort the rest of the way?” All runners do
this to an extent, but pacing masters do it in a more focused way, actively
listening to their perception of effort rather than passively hearing it, as less
skilled pacers do. By actively studying their subjective effort, pacing
masters not only are better able to answer the all-important sustainability
question assuredly but also are able to draw deeper learning from each race,
so their answers are even more assured in the next one. A less skilled pacer
cannot instantly become a pacing master by emulating their practice of
really tuning in to their effort during races, but they can begin to close the
gap in this fashion.
By the way, the correct answer to the question “Can I sustain this effort
the rest of the way?” (as former 1-hour cycling time trial world record
holder Chris Boardman has noted) is not “Yes” but “Maybe.” Surprised?
Think about it: If you answer “Yes” to this question, meaning you’re sure
the effort is sustainable, then you’re all but sure to fall short of your real
limit. Keep in mind that to succeed in finding your limit in a race is to just
barely escape hitting the wall before you finish, and there’s just no way to
flirt so closely with disaster without running in a state of uncertainty most
of the way. The risk of actually hitting the wall with this approach is
minimal because the moment the runner’s “Maybe” tilts too far in the
direction of “No,” warning of impending disaster, they slow down
immediately, before it’s too late. In regulating their effort during races,
pacing masters deliberately seek the narrow zone of uncertainty that lies
between knowing they can keep up their current pace and knowing they
can’t. This chosen uncertainty is very different from the cluelessness of the
novice runner, who has no earthly idea whether they’re running too fast or
too slow or just right. It’s a definite “Maybe,” if you will. While the runner
does not know for sure if they can sustain the effort, they do know that if
they’re running too fast or too slow, it’s not by much.
When a race you’re doing is similar in most respects to others of its kind
that you’ve done in the past, you can pace your way through it by regulating
your effort based on your knowledge of how you should be feeling at each
point along the way. Suppose there’s a half-marathon you’ve run twice
before, but in your third go at it, you’re forced to complete it under a heavy
downpour. In this case, you’ll want to make sure your core effort level is the
same at 4 miles, at 7 miles, and so forth as it was in prior dry years
--- PAGE 128 ---
(assuming you paced those races well), letting the actual numbers take care
of themselves rather than keying them off based on some prior calculation.
Such comparative adjustments are less useful in races that are so unique
in design that they really can’t be compared to other races of the same
distance. Kilian Jornet’s course record at the Hardrock 100 (22:41:35) is
more than 7 hours slower than Jim Walmsley’s course record at the Western
States 100, not because Jornet is an inferior runner or Hardrock a less
competitive race but because the course is far more difficult. A runner who
is competing in either of these events for the first time will need to draw on
their experience in a general way when answering the question, “Is this
effort sustainable?” When planning for extreme races of this sort, you can
set rough expectations for your performance by studying historical results.
How have runners of similar ability fared in this particular event in past
years? Obtaining this information will make you slightly less reliant on
perceptions in the early part of the race.
Don’t Be Afraid to Make a Mistake
Having a bad race due to poor pacing is not the end of the world—unless
it’s the Worlds End Ultramarathon in Pennsylvania’s Loyalsock State
Forest, in which case it’s the end of the world even if your pacing is nearly
perfect. Always remember that pacing mistakes are grist for the mill of
pacing skill development. Yes, it’s disappointing—and sometimes
downright painful—to hit the wall in a race as a result of misjudging your
limit. But each of these experiences has the potential to teach you a lesson
that will help you pace better next time.
I say “has the potential” because learning from pacing errors is not
automatic. As the philosopher John Dewey wrote, “We do not learn from
experience. . . . We learn from reflecting on experience.” To avoid repeating
the same pacing mistake over and over, you need to reflect on what you did
wrong and then take a conscious intention to do otherwise into your next
race. This is where decision tracking comes in. After each race, evaluate
your pacing decisions with a critical eye, flag the mistakes, and ask yourself
what you could have done differently to produce a better overall
performance. You can’t go back in time, but you can ensure that history
doesn’t repeat itself.
--- PAGE 129 ---
Not Sticking to the Plan
Professional triathlete Jesse Thomas came into the 2016 Ironman World
Championship with a solid plan. On the basis of prior experience at the
Ironman distance as well as recent training performance, he had identified a
power target that he intended to sustain throughout the bike leg. A strong
runner (he’d won state championships in track and cross country in high
school and earned all-American status in the same sports at Stanford
University), Thomas needed to ride hard enough to avoid giving up too
much ground to the competition but not so hard that his legs had nothing
left for the marathon, and his power target struck this balance.
As I say, it was a sound plan. But when he got out onto the bike course
and found himself being left behind by übercyclists Sebastian Kienle and
Michael Weiss, Thomas cast aside his pre-race strategy and gave chase.
Upon reaching the 60-mile mark in the hilltop village of Hawi, Thomas
discovered that his average power output up to that point exceeded not just
the target he’d set but also his average power in a recent race of half the
distance, Ironman 70.3 Santa Cruz.
“And then I just completely crumbled,” Thomas told a reporter for
Triathlete after his disappointing 16th-place finish. “It was a long, long,
long day.”
Sound familiar? Long days are as common in running as they are in
triathlon. All too often, runners arrive at the start line with a well-thought-
out pacing plan for the race, only to crumple it up and go faster than
intended, whether in reaction to the athletes around them, or as a panic
response to an early setback such as having a shoelace come untied, or even
just because they feel unexpectedly terrific. Assuming the plan was indeed
the right one, such spontaneous departures from script seldom end well, as
Jesse Thomas can attest. It’s almost as if the you who plans for the race is
different from the you who does the race, a less rational version of yourself
addled by adrenaline, stress, and competitive juices.
To avoid letting the you who races abandon the plan created by the you
who prepares, take a cue from brave Ulysses, that hero of ancient Greek
literature. In Homer’s Odyssey, Ulysses resists falling prey to the Sirens’
song by having himself tied to the mast of his boat. That is essentially what
you need to do to yourself in committing to your pacing plan for the next
--- PAGE 130 ---
race. Take a mental step back from the plan itself and vow to stick to it
unless something happens during the race that truly requires you to make an
adjustment. This note to your future self will bind you to the mast of your
plan when you’re tempted to stray from it.
A historical counterpoint to Jesse Thomas’s “long, long, long day” at the
2016 Ironman World Championship was Mark Allen’s performance at the
same event 19 years earlier. It was Allen’s swan song as a professional
triathlete, a do-or-die attempt to match his former rival Dave Scott’s record
of six world titles at age 37. Allen’s plan for the bike leg was to keep his
heart rate at or below 150 beats per minute, a number that, like Thomas’s
power target, he’d arrived at through experience. In the early miles, Allen
lost his lead to a pair of younger Germans, the strongest of whom, Thomas
“Hell on Wheels” Hellriegel, eventually built a seemingly insurmountable
advantage of 13:31 over the five-time champion. But the reason Allen fell
so far behind wasn’t that he couldn’t go faster. Rather, he lost ground
because he chose not to go faster, knowing that sticking to his plan gave
him the best chance of winning, regardless of what anyone else did.
Resisting the temptation to push harder wasn’t easy, but Allen’s Ulysses-
like discipline was rewarded when a grimacing Hellriegel cracked during
the marathon and Allen slid past him and into history.
Remember Mark Allen the next time you’re tempted to crumple up your
pacing plan midrace.
Sticking Too Much to the Plan
I’ll stop picking on Jesse Thomas in a minute, but before I do, I’d like to
share something that was said by the winner of the 2016 Ironman World
Championship, Jan Frodeno, who finished more than 26 minutes ahead of
Thomas on that “long, long, long day.” “On race day,” Frodeno told
Slowtwitch reporter Timothy Carlson, “statistics and numbers all really go
to shit.” In other words, you can plan all you want, but you’d better be
ready to scrap it if the reality you confront in the race is different from the
one your plan assumed.
At first blush, Frodeno’s sentiment might seem to contradict the advice I
just gave you to stick to your pacing plan in races, as Mark Allen did so
successfully in 1997. But remember the qualifier: “unless something
--- PAGE 131 ---
happens during the race that truly requires you to make an adjustment.” It
was this caveat that Frodeno was referring to in his colorful post-race
remark. To find your limit in a race, you must first have a good plan, and
then you must have the discipline to resist emotionally driven temptations
to abandon the plan, but you must also be willing to depart from your target
numbers if circumstances create a need to do so. And as Jan Frodeno would
tell you, in most races, it becomes necessary at some point to improvise, at
least in small ways.
I’ll give you a personal example of the consequences of sticking to a plan
too stubbornly and the rewards of improvising intelligently midrace. In
2002, I ran the Long Beach Marathon in the hope of finishing in 2:45, or 1
minute faster than my personal best. I started at the required pace of 6:18
per mile and held it consistently as I made my way through the pancake-flat
course, but around mile 8, the pace began to feel harder than it should have,
and my gut told me to slow down. But a second instinct overruled my gut,
and I stuck to the plan, with the result that I hit the wall at 21 miles and
walked the last 3 miles, finishing in 3:11:16.
Seven years later, I ran the Silicon Valley Marathon with the goal of
finishing in 2:39, having recently recorded a half-marathon time that made
this goal very reasonable. I started the race at the required pace of 6:05 per
mile and held it consistently, but around mile 6, the pace began to feel
harder than it should have, and my gut told me to slow down. Right on cue,
a second instinct urged me to press on. This time, however, I heeded my gut
and eased back to a pace that felt more realistic. The result was that, at 21
miles, I had enough energy left to speed up again, and I finished in 2:41:29,
missing my goal but still achieving a new personal best.
Remember that the purpose of a pacing plan is not to carry it out no
matter what but to help you achieve a successful race and be open to the
possibility that achieving a successful race will require you to modify or
even abandon your plan on the fly. These decisions aren’t always easy.
Sometimes it’s hard to know which voice to trust among those squabbling
inside your head. I doubt I would have made the good decision I did in the
Silicon Valley Marathon if I hadn’t made bad decisions like the one I made
in the Long Beach Marathon 7 years earlier. Your chances of making the
right decision in these difficult moments will be greater if you understand
exactly what’s happening in them, as you now do.
--- PAGE 132 ---
Racing for Position
If you want a better understanding of the difference between racing for
time, which has been our topic up to this point, and racing for position,
which entails trying to finish ahead of other runners, watch the 2016
Olympics men’s 1500 m final. The metric mile, as it is known, goes all the
way back to the first modern Olympics in 1896 and is almost always a
tactical affair, which is a diplomatic way of saying slow. That’s because the
person who is leading after the first or second of the race’s 3.75 total laps
seldom wins, so nobody wants to lead, and the pace suffers accordingly. But
this particular race was an extreme case.
American Matthew Centrowitz came to Rio as the reigning indoor world
champion and a strong medal contender. As such, he did not want to bear
the burden of leading any more than the other finalists, but that’s precisely
where he found himself after the usual sprint for position over the first 100
meters. Centro’s medal aspirations were far from dashed at this point, but
they soon would be if he either ran too hard and used up all his energy
while allowing the other runners to cruise in his slipstream or ran too slow
and allowed himself to get boxed in by competitors passing him on the
outside. The solution he arrived at was to run slow enough (66 seconds for
lap one, 69 seconds for lap two) to tempt other racers to pass him and then
abruptly speed up each time a runner tried to do so.
The result was one of the most tactically brilliant running performances I
have ever witnessed. Knowing that his competitors were only willing to
gamble so much on a bid to seize the lead before the last lap, Centro
accelerated as much as necessary to cause each succeeding aspirant to think
better of it and fall back. His own gamble was to exert the least effort
possible to retain the lead no matter what, even going so far as to throw a
couple of elbows at indoor 1000 m world record holder Ayanleh Souleiman
as he tried to overtake the American in lap three.
Predictably, all hell broke loose when the bell rang, signaling the final
lap. Now everyone was willing to risk everything to pass Centrowitz, who
was no less motivated to fight them off, and though Souleiman was able to
briefly nose ahead of him on the outside, he couldn’t close the deal by
moving to the rail, and within seconds, Centro was back ahead, where he
remained all the way to the finish. His winning formula was utterly original
—leading from the very first step until he stopped the clock at 3:50.00, a
--- PAGE 133 ---
time that would be surpassed 3 weeks later by the top four finishers in the
final of the Paralympic men’s 1500 m T13.
The three keys to racing successfully for position—all exemplified by
Matthew Centrowitz’s Rio performance—are (1) playing to your strengths,
(2) using the runners you’re trying to beat to your own best advantage, and
(3) running your race.
Play to Your Strengths
Each runner has a different combination of strengths and weaknesses than
other runners of similar overall ability. Hence if you want to finish ahead of
them in a race, you must try to neutralize their strengths with yours. I used
to coach a trail runner who had a preternatural gift for bombing down
technical descents at high speeds without face-planting. Recognizing this
strength, we strategized in a way that enabled him to win races by dropping
competitors on early descents and using later descents to overtake
competitors he’d allowed to get away from him on preceding climbs and
flatter sections. Consider your relative strengths as a runner and how to
exploit them in individual races against particular competitors you’ll face at
those events.
Use Other Runners
In everyday life, it is considered unscrupulous to use other people. In
competitive running, however, you’re a sucker if you don’t! Think of the
runners you’re trying to beat as objects that you can manipulate in certain
ways to increase your chances of finishing ahead of them. An extreme
example of this mentality comes from my friend and fellow running coach
James McKirdy, who was one of Connecticut’s top decathletes in his high
school days. In his senior outdoor track season, McKirdy came into the
final event of the state championship—the 1500-meter run—in third place,
113 points behind leader Josh Fournier and needing to beat him soundly to
claim the title. Prior to the race, McKirdy’s coach told him to forget
everything he knew about smart pacing and run the first lap ridiculously
fast, knowing that Fournier, who was more of a sprint specialist, would
mark him closely and pay the price later. More than willing to give this
unconventional strategy a try, McKirdy completed the opening 400-meter
circuit in 61 seconds (or 5 seconds faster than Matthew Centrowitz in the
--- PAGE 134 ---
2016 Olympics), with Fournier glued to his heels. Sure enough, as McKirdy
lost steam, Fournier imploded, eventually staggering across the finish line
33 seconds behind the wily winner.
As a coach today, James McKirdy defines racing (meaning racing for
position) as affecting how someone else performs with your decisions. This
is exactly what I mean by using other runners to your own best advantage.
The example I just provided is over the top, but there are lots of other
specific decision types that you can use to affect the performance of other
runners in competition. These include surging to test the legs of a
competitor you’re currently matching strides with, tucking in behind other
runners to let them do the extra work of blocking the wind and setting the
pace, masking your discomfort behind a poker face to sow doubt in the
mind of a competitor, and exaggerating your discomfort (i.e., playing
possum) to make another runner overconfident before you strike.
Run Your Race
The flip side of controlling other runners in such ways is not allowing them
to control you. Running your own race means pacing your race in a way
that best serves your competitive interests regardless of what your
competitors do. I witnessed a good example of this strategy at the 2007
USATF Cross Country Championships in Boulder, Colorado. Dathan
Ritzenhein took the men’s senior race out hard, breaking away from the
lead pack just 1 km into the 12K race. Alan Culpepper, judging the pace too
aggressive, elected to let him go, a decision that resulted in Ritzenhein
gapping him by 20 seconds over the next 3 km. But in lap four of six, Ritz
began to falter, and Culpepper’s self-control was rewarded with a
dominating 26-second victory.
In the heat of battle, it can be difficult to make the correct split-second
decision in reaction (or nonreaction) to something another runner does. In
some instances, it’s in your best interest to cover a competitor’s surge; in
others, it’s best to let the runner go. You won’t always make the right
decision, but if you run each race with the intent to control your
performance regardless of others’ actions, and if you use post-race decision
tracking to assess your tactical decisions, you will eventually get to a place
where you (almost always) do the right thing.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 135 ---
8
Macropacing
Catching COVID-19 wasn’t the only thing I did in Atlanta in February
2020. I also watched the US Olympic Team Trials women’s and men’s
marathons, which took place the day before my last official race. It’s hard to
think of a better way to get psyched up for competition. Tens of thousands
of running fans crowded the sidewalks to witness big names like Galen
Rupp and Des Linden as well as up-and-comers including Jake Riley and
Molly Seidel take their best shot at qualifying for the Tokyo Olympics. It
was a thrilling experience, and among the biggest thrills for me, as a 48-
year-old, still-competitive runner, was seeing 43-year-old Abdi Abdirahman
qualify for his fifth Olympics with a third-place finish in the men’s race.
I had followed Abdi’s career from the beginning, and I had even run with
him a few years earlier, so I wasn’t quite as surprised as some people were
by his performance in Atlanta. I knew the answer to the question many
folks were asking about Abdi after the race: “What’s his secret?”
In a word, pacing.
Until this point I’ve been writing as if pacing happens only within
individual runs, but that’s only one kind of pacing, which we can now
classify as micropacing. If micropacing is the “goal-directed distribution
and management of effort across the duration of an exercise bout,”
macropacing is the goal-directed distribution of effort across a full training
cycle or even an entire competitive running career. Within a single run,
pacing enables a runner to find their present limit. Over longer time spans, a
slightly different application of the same basic aptitude allows runners like
Abdi Abdirahman to reach and sustain their ultimate limit.
Macropacing is not simply an extended version of race pacing, however.
Side-by-side graphs of optimal race pacing and optimal career pacing
would look rather different. In race pacing, as we know, the watchword is
steadiness. A graph of a well-paced race takes the shape of a horizontal line
--- PAGE 136 ---
with gentle undulations and perhaps a spike at the very end marking the
finishing kick. A graph of Abdi Abdirahman’s entire running career, by
contrast, would look more like an upward-sloping sine wave, with sharp
dips indicating the 3- to 4-week breaks he took after each training cycle,
occasional peaks representing periods when he was doing as much work as
his body could absorb (like when I met him a few weeks before the 2017
New York City Marathon), and longer, flattish segments between these
peaks and valleys representing an overall pattern of consistency (week after
week, month after month, and year after year of speed sessions every
Tuesday or Wednesday, tempo runs every Friday, and long runs every
Sunday). In short, effective macropacing is a matter of being steady but not
too steady. If condensed into a single run, the career of Abdirahman and
every other runner who just keeps rolling along, season after season, would
take the form of a brisk jog broken up by brief accelerations to full speed
and occasional dead stops.
You don’t have to be Abdi Abdirahman to make five Olympic teams.
Wait a minute—yes, you do! That’s not what I meant to say. What I meant
to say is that most of the macropacing errors runners make can be avoided
by following the example of runners like Abdi. If you were to receive
advice on macropacing directly from such a runner, they would tell you six
things:
1. Be patient.
2. Don’t get greedy.
3. Be balanced.
4. Do it your way.
5. Don’t let yourself go.
6. Stay in love.
My advice is the same, though I might need more words to express it.
Be Patient
Sara Hall ran her first marathon in Los Angeles in 2015, 1 month before her
33rd birthday. Hall was then well along in a successful professional running
--- PAGE 137 ---
career that included appearances at the Pan Am Games, the World Indoor
Championships, and the World Cross Country Championships. But the
marathon is a different animal. Struck by leg cramps in the middle miles,
she hobbled across the finish line in 2:48:02.
Eight months later, in Chicago, Hall improved her marathon time to
2:31:14. The following year, she took another minute off her personal best.
In 2017, she lowered her PB twice more, going from 2:28:26 in Tokyo to
2:27:21 in Frankfurt. Hall’s lone marathon in 2018, held in out-of-the-way
Ottawa, was yet another incremental improvement: 2:26:19. In Berlin the
next fall, she dropped her time to 2:22:16, and in 2020, at age 37, Hall won
the Marathon Project in 2:20:32, the second-fastest time ever run by an
American woman.
After setting the last of these marks, Hall told New York Times writer
Lindsay Crouse, “We can be an instant-gratification culture, but I’ve had to
cultivate a long-term approach to my career. I figured as long as I could
keep working on my craft, chipping away, finding joy in the mundane, then
that had to be enough.” This patient mindset is a requirement for successful
macropacing. Progress can’t be rushed in running. Improvement often does
come quickly in the beginning, but years of methodical “chipping away” (a
phrase that was also used by macropacing master Ben Bruce in reference to
his own progression) are required to fulfill the last percentage of a runner’s
potential.
Running tends to attract patient people and cultivate patience in the
people it attracts. It’s not patience most runners lack but rather an
understanding of how to exercise their patience to achieve long-term
improvement. Sara Hall lowered her marathon time by 28 minutes over a
span of 5 years. Stated like that, it seems like a big leap, but Hall didn’t
make any leaps in the process of fulfilling her marathon potential. She did
not attempt to radically increase her training load or rethink her whole
approach to training in search of enormous improvements. Instead, she
learned from each marathon cycle, applied what she learned to the next one,
and raised the bar a little higher. This is the right formula for manifesting
patience in the career arc of any runner.
Don’t Get Greedy
--- PAGE 138 ---
Drew Hunter returned home to Boulder, Colorado, from Oslo, Norway, in
June 2019 with a shiny new PB of 7:39 for 3000 meters and plenty of time
to rest a sore right foot he’d acquired while in Europe before he needed to
sharpen up for the USATF Outdoor Championships in late July. But the 21-
year-old was so hyped up about his soaring fitness that instead of resting, he
dove straight back into heavy training, with predictable results. Within a
few weeks, Hunter’s foot pain had intensified to the point where he was
forced to reduce his run frequency to three times per week. Remarkably, he
was still able to qualify for the World Athletics Championships in the 5000-
meter event, but when he went out to celebrate the achievement with his
teammates, he couldn’t even put weight on the foot, and he was later forced
to withdraw from the competition.
“The biggest thing I’ve learned this year is to not get too greedy with
mileage,” Hunter told Runner’s World writer Hailey Middlebrook in the
wake of this disappointment. “Runners have this mindset that more is
always better, and that if I’m doing well on ‘X’ mileage, that I’ll be even
faster if I do more. But that’s not the case.”
The British term purple patch refers to a period when everything is going
right for an athlete. They’re nailing every workout, feeling fit, and enjoying
the process. It is extremely tempting at these times to keep pushing for
more, but doing so almost always leads to regret. Purple patches never last
long. They can’t because they occur when a runner is very close to peak
fitness, which is not a sustainable state. Too often, runners become
intoxicated by how well they are running and make a bad decision, either
training harder to see if they can get even fitter or ignoring signs that their
bodies are at their limits (as Drew Hunter did).
When a purple patch is well timed, a runner is able to complete their peak
race in good health and with supreme fitness. But some then get greedy and
try to extend their purple patch, teeing up another race to run when they
should follow Abdi Abdirahman’s example and take a break. These efforts
to milk a fitness peak rarely turn out well.
It is only human to get excited when you’re killing it in training. But a
part of you should also be wary when you enter a purple patch. Know that it
can’t last long. Enjoy the experience, and don’t risk spoiling it—or worse,
delaying your next opportunity to hit a purple patch—by trying to go for
more.
--- PAGE 139 ---
Be Balanced
There is a common misconception that the greatest athletes are completely
obsessed with their sport and make little room in their lives for anything
else. Although some such athletes do exist, most of the top runners I’ve
gotten to know are strikingly balanced. A good example is Kellyn Taylor,
another member of the NAZ Elite team with whom I trained in 2017. Taylor
is also a good example of a macropacing master, having set her personal-
best times for 5000 meters, 10,000 meters, the half-marathon, and the
marathon between the ages of 31 and 34 after achieving no small measure
of success earlier in her career.
The furthest thing from a running geek, or the type of runner who
consumes lots of running media and spends a lot of time talking about
running, Kellyn puts the sport completely out of her mind when she’s not
actively engaged in it. Her top priority is parenting her daughter, Kylyn,
who was born when Kellyn was just getting started in her professional
running career, as well as a number of foster children that she and her
husband, Kyle, have taken into their home over the years. During the time I
spent with Taylor and her teammates in Flagstaff, she was deeply immersed
in training to become a professional firefighter, a commitment that absorbed
tremendous amounts of time and energy. Understandably, Taylor was
usually the last runner to arrive for a team workout and the first one to leave
after completing it.
You might think this busy, multidimensional lifestyle would be a recipe
for poor running, but Taylor’s results speak for themselves. And although I
can’t think of another elite runner who is also a firefighter and a foster
parent, balanced human beings are the norm at the highest level of all
sports, not just running. Evidence of this comes from an analysis conducted
by the Australian Institute of Sport’s Personal Excellence program, which
focuses on the holistic development of athletes with the goal of maximizing
their overall well-being. Program director Megan Fritsch gathered
information on the makeup and performance of the Australian Olympic
Team in the 2008 and 2012 Summer Games. Interestingly, she found that in
both Beijing and London, student athletes were more likely than other
athletes to win medals, with student athletes accounting for 40 percent of
the 2012 Australian Olympic team and 63 percent of the medals brought
home from London. Of course, student athlete status is not a guarantee of
--- PAGE 140 ---
life-sport balance, but it is a serviceable stand-in for the purposes of this
type of analysis.
The idea that caring a little less about running and a little more about
other parts of life yields better long-term running performance is somewhat
counterintuitive. How does it work? Psychologists who’ve looked at this
question have identified a few different reasons. One is simply that
balanced athletes are happier, and happier people perform better in any
activity they’re passionate about. Athletes are human beings, after all, not
exercise machines, and human beings have many facets. An athlete can
pretend they have only one facet by focusing exclusively on one of them—
sport—but the fact of the matter is that they do have other facets, which
then whither from neglect, weakening the foundation of overall well-being
that athletic performance depends on.
In an interview conducted for the Marathon Handbook after he won the
1974 Commonwealth Games Marathon, English runner Ian Thompson said,
“I was happy about a lot of other things in life besides my running.
Everything was clicking, and I was in a relaxed frame of mind—which is
ideal.” These words hold true for every runner. If you want to run your very
best, you must fit running into your life in a way that makes you happy with
a lot of other things besides your running. In fact, the mere temptation to
allow running to completely dominate a person’s life is a pretty good
indication that the person isn’t happy in the first place. Submitting to this
temptation will only make things worse. I’ve been known to tell my athletes
that if all they care about is running, their best move is to start caring about
other things because doing so will aid their running.
Becoming unbalanced in the direction of sport also tends to negatively
impact self-esteem and confidence, which in turn harms performance. A bad
race is less likely to strike a blow to a runner’s self-esteem and confidence
if that race comes the day after the runner aced a chemistry exam or was
named Employee of the Week or saw their son give his first piano recital.
As these examples show, runners with balanced lives have more sources of
positive self-esteem and confidence than runners whose identity is
completely enmeshed in the sport. In much the same way that a diverse
stock portfolio reduces the risk of being dragged down financially by one
bad investment, having a balanced life reduces the risk of being dragged
down emotionally by disappointment or failure in one area.
--- PAGE 141 ---
Balanced runners are also at a lower risk of overdoing their training. It’s
easy to see why. Suppose you quit your job for the sake of turning pro and
focusing exclusively on running. The first week is likely to be dominated by
feelings of excitement, freedom, and hope. But by Thursday of week 2, you
might find yourself sitting on the sofa at three o’clock in the afternoon,
bored, having already run twice, lifted weights, and stretched, and think, I
suppose it couldn’t hurt to kill some time with a little light crosstraining . . .
This is why actual professional runners like Kellyn Taylor maintain
balanced lives despite having the freedom to go all-in with running. Taylor
doesn’t have time to overtrain. Heck, she doesn’t even have time (or at least
doesn’t feel she has time) for the fancy mobility exercises that her
teammates and other elite runners do before every run. She just shows up
and goes, which might not be the best thing from a purely physiological
perspective, but again, her results speak for themselves.
Beyond making it harder to overtrain, having a rich life outside of
running increases training efficiency. When you have only so much time
and energy to devote to your training, you are motivated to make the most
of every minute. It’s a version of Parkinson’s Law—the idea that one’s
work expands to fill the time available to get it done. Aware that the obverse
is true too, savvy corporations use project deadlines and time restrictions as
a means to force employees to tighten up their practices in ways that
increase the overall quality of their work. You can do the same with your
training by strictly compartmentalizing running in the context of your life.
As the saying goes, “If you want to get something done, ask a busy person.”
Do It Your Way
The people of Maine are known for their stubborn independence. In this
respect, Joan Benoit Samuelson is a “Down-Easter” through and through.
Her high school didn’t have a girls varsity cross country or track team, so
she ran with the boys. When she turned pro, Nike tried to convince her to
move to Oregon, where she could train with other high-caliber athletes, but
she refused, choosing instead to run alone in her beloved home state. She
had a coach (the highly regarded Bob Sevene), but she didn’t take much
direction from him, preferring to “train by the seat of her pants,” as she put
it to me in a 2010 interview.
--- PAGE 142 ---
Joan is best known, of course, for winning the 1984 Olympic Women’s
Marathon. Only 27 years old at the time, she was expected to defend her
title 4 years later in Seoul, but she turned down the opportunity in favor of
raising a family. Having made this choice, Joan was expected to retire from
elite running, but she chose instead to make a number of sporadic
comebacks, finishing ninth in the 2000 Olympic Trials Marathon at 43,
qualifying for the Olympic Trials Marathon again at 50, and setting an age-
group national marathon record of 2:49:09 at 52. Still going strong in her
late sixties, Joan won her age group at the 2022 London Marathon.
There are a million ways to be a runner. And although some ways work
better than others from a performance standpoint, the runners who perform
best over time tend to be those who, like Joan Benoit, give themselves
permission to do it their way instead of blindly conforming to expectations.
Certain rules can’t be broken if you want to extend your peak years as a
competitor. But within the framework defined by these unbreakable rules,
there’s plenty of freedom to find your own personal sweet spot, and the
more stubborn independence you show in exercising this freedom, the
better things will turn out for you.
Don’t Let Yourself Go
In the winter of 1987, when I was a junior in high school, I competed in an
indoor track meet at Dartmouth College. Word got out during the meet that
the legendary Henry Rono would be taking part in an open 5000 m race
after the kids were finished competing. Already a huge fan of the sport, I
knew all about Rono, who in 1978 had broken four world records at
distances ranging from 3000 meters to 10,000 meters in the span of 81 days.
Alcoholism soon derailed his career, but at age 34, Rono had committed
himself to staging a comeback, and the indoor 5000 m race that I forced my
entire team to hang around and watch instead of getting started on the long
bus ride back home was his first rust buster.
It did not go well. Rono started out okay, pushing the pace up front with
Jersey boy Marty Ludwikowski, but he never looked comfortable, and
within a few laps, he’d begun to fall back. Having clocked 13:06 for the
same distance 9 years earlier, he finished eighth in 14:38. His comeback
fizzled not long thereafter.
--- PAGE 143 ---
Henry Rono’s story is a cautionary tale for runners who want to run well
not just today but also tomorrow and 10 years from now. It goes without
saying that if you try to push hard all the time, you’re not likely to perform
at or near peak level for years on end. But longevity in the sport is just as
unlikely if you back off too much, to the point of “letting yourself go,” or
dig yourself into a hole that’s hard to get out of. Rono’s alcoholism is an
extreme example of the phenomenon, but there are less extreme and more
common ways of letting oneself go that are also harmful to macropacing.
Take my brother Josh. Three years older than me, Josh started running at
the same time I did, a few years before my close encounter with Henry
Rono. We were closely matched in ability, our PBs only a few seconds apart
at a variety of distances. But whereas I kept running throughout my
twenties, thirties, and forties, Josh went for long stretches without ever
lacing up his shoes and gained a lot of weight during these times.
Consequently, when at age 48 he embarked on a quest to qualify for the
Boston Marathon, it took him seemingly forever to excavate his talent from
underneath the layers of disuse it was buried under. He got there eventually,
but he often regretted those years of letting himself go.
I want to emphasize that the message here is not that you should never
place running on life’s back burner. Just be sure not to remove it from the
stovetop entirely if you have any intention of racing well in the future.
Stay in Love
Although I saved this fifth “rule” of macropacing for last, I think it’s the
most important one. If you spend time talking to a dozen runners who have
succeeded in performing at or near their ultimate limit for a long time, the
most striking shared quality you will see in them is a great passion for
running. For proof, look no further than our friend Abdi Abdirahman, who
told PodiumRunner’s Hannah Borenstein before the 2020 Olympic Trials,
“I love running. It’s my hobby.”
When an experienced runner continues to enjoy running year after year
as much as they did when they first fell in love with the sport, they
invariably find ways to keep running well. All too often, though, that initial
thrill dissipates over time, and running becomes a mere habit maintained by
its own inertia rather than by the force of passion. It’s no tragedy for a
--- PAGE 144 ---
runner to fall out of love with running and trade it for golf or rock climbing,
but it is sad when a runner keeps putting the same amount of energy into
their running as they did during the courting phase but no longer feels
they’re getting the same return in enjoyment.
When the thrill does fade, it does so typically because the runner forgets
why they fell in love with running in the first place. In the beginning, it’s
running itself that brings joy, but all too often, as time passes, the act of
putting one foot in front of the other becomes a means to an end—faster
times, high-age-group finishes, hitting qualifying standards. The problem is
that, for every goal a runner achieves, they complete hundreds of thousands
of steps. So who do you think enjoys running more: the runner who
achieves the occasional goal or the one who continues to find joy in the
very act of running?
One runner who never forgot why he fell in love with running is Haile
Gebrselassie. He started at age 7, inspired by the exploits of his older
countryman Miruts Yifter, who won two gold medals for Ethiopia at the
1980 Olympics. Though his father discouraged the hobby, dismissing it as a
waste of time, Geb ran anyway, a toothy smile expressing the pure bliss he
felt as he traveled barefoot at 8,000 feet. That ever-present smile would
become his trademark, inspiring one writer to describe him as “the happiest
man in running.”
I met Geb in 2009 at a press event hosted by his shoe sponsor in Los
Angeles. Fresh off a victory at the Berlin Marathon, where he’d broken his
own world record, he transformed an obligatory appearance into an
unforgettable spectacle when he hijacked a demonstration of new Adidas
gear by spontaneously running a 4-minute mile on a treadmill, beaming like
a child on a playground. “A day without running is like a day without
eating,” he said in a 2013 interview for the Guardian. “I love running, and I
will always run.”
In a professional career that spanned nearly a quarter of a century, Haile
Gebrselassie set an astonishing 27 world records and earned 9 Olympic and
World Championship medals, 6 of them gold. Clearly, the childlike
enthusiasm for running that he maintained from his first race till his last did
not stop him from performing at his best. Quite the opposite, in fact. It is
simply no accident that the person who loves running more than anyone
--- PAGE 145 ---
else ever has and the most accomplished runner in history are the same
person.
How to stay in love with running is no secret. It’s just a matter of
continuing to run for the same reason you did when you first fell in love,
even as you make room in your heart for other reasons, such as achieving
results. One thing that can help in this regard is checking in with yourself
regularly about your relationship with running, perhaps through a journal.
When you notice a dip in your enjoyment level, flag it and reflect on ways
to rekindle the flame.
Most often, enjoyment dips when a runner becomes fixated on outcomes
and rises when they focus on the moment-to-moment process. Relationship
check-ins are just one way to do this. Others include self-reminder mantras
such as the oldie but goodie, “Run the mile you’re in.” The main thing is to
get in the habit of catching yourself in those moments when your mind tries
to leap ahead to the endpoint so you can deploy whichever particular
method is most appropriate for the situation.
To the extent that you succeed in shifting your focus from outcomes to
the process, you will feel liberated, as though an invisible burden has been
lifted from your shoulders. When you’re focused on outcomes, you’re
essentially saying, “I will be happy if and only if I achieve my goal,” a
mindset that causes the quality of your running experience to depend on
something over which you have only partial control. But when you’re
focused on the process, you’re saying to yourself, “I’m going to enjoy
doing my best in this run, win or lose,” a mindset that puts you in total
control of the quality of your experience.
Recently I attended a running camp where I met a runner named Traci,
who had recently suffered through a disastrous first ultramarathon and was
having trouble moving past it.
“What’s the point?” she asked me rhetorically. “You train for months to
achieve a goal, and then you fall flat on your face, and it all seems wasted.”
“It sounds like you want a guarantee of success every time you start a
race,” I said. “But do you really? How much would success really mean if
you couldn’t fail?”
“I guess you’re right,” Traci conceded.
--- PAGE 146 ---
Lots of runners think they want guaranteed success, but there’s very little
satisfaction to be gleaned from a successful outcome when the true credit
belongs not to the runner themselves but to some outside guarantee . . . or a
sports watch. What runners like Traci really want is not guaranteed success
but to be in control of their performance—to not need an omnipotent
smartwatch or any other form of outside help to run a race they’re proud of.
At the beginning of this book, I claimed that the most satisfying
experience you can have as a competitive runner is knowing what you can
do and then going out and doing it. The feeling of confident self-
determination that comes with this knowledge makes the entire race
experience enjoyable, regardless of outcome, and it is a feeling available
only to those who master the skill of pacing at both levels, micro and macro
—for this and only this can free a runner from all external dependencies.
A perfect race is not a race that goes perfectly. It’s a race that the runner
could not have completed any faster. The weather, good or bad, makes no
difference. How you feel, good or bad, doesn’t matter. A perfect race is
achievable even when absolutely nothing goes your way. Success and
failure are entirely within your control, depending on nothing else besides
your capacity to read your body, to try really hard, and to make smart
decisions. You might not have these capacities today, but I can assure you
that the only way you will ever have them is by actively seeking them—
something you now know how to do. Remember, a perfect race is a
perfectly paced race, and pacing is the art of finding your limit. Don’t wait
for your limit to find you. It never will. Go find it!
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 147 ---
9
5K Training Plans
The four training plans presented in this chapter are designed to help
runners master the art of pacing and find their limit at the 5K distance. The
various levels cover the needs of everyone from first-timers to elites. Refer
back to Chapter 6 for details on the RPE-based intensity scale used
throughout the plans and for full explanations of certain terms and workout
types. Online versions of the plans are available for separate purchase on
the 80/20 Endurance web site. Additionally, device-compatible free
versions of the individual workouts can be found at
https://www.8020endurance.com.
Level 0
This plan is appropriate for beginning runners preparing for their first 5K
event and for more experienced runners who need or prefer a relatively
low-volume training program for any reason. Before starting the plan, be
sure to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably able to run
5 days a week for up to 30 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
Week 1
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 148 ---
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
--- PAGE 149 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 2
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 20:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 150 ---
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
--- PAGE 151 ---
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 4
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3
5:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 152 ---
4 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 5
--- PAGE 153 ---
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
--- PAGE 154 ---
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
--- PAGE 155 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 7
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 156 ---
Rest
Friday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
12:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 8
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Relaxed Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort, 1:00 rest
2 km at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 157 ---
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 9
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 158 ---
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Rest
Thursday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at CV
Friday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
5K Race
Sunday
Rest
Level 1
This plan was designed for runners who are ready to take their training load
up a notch in order to improve their 5K time. Before starting the plan, be
--- PAGE 159 ---
sure to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably able to run
6 days a week for up to 40 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
Week 1
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
--- PAGE 160 ---
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 2
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
--- PAGE 161 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 20:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 3
Monday
--- PAGE 162 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
--- PAGE 163 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 4
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 164 ---
Friday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 5
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
--- PAGE 165 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 6
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 166 ---
Tuesday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 167 ---
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 7
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Tempo Run
--- PAGE 168 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
12:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 8
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Relaxed Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort, 1:00 rest
2 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 169 ---
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 9
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
--- PAGE 170 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at CV
Friday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
5K Race
Sunday
Rest
Level 2
This plan is a good fit for experienced competitive runners who are
prepared to train hard in pursuit of improved 5K performance. Before
--- PAGE 171 ---
starting the plan, be sure to build your training to the point where you’re
comfortably able to run 7 days a week for up to 70 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
10KP 10K Pace
Week 1
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 172 ---
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 30:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 2
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 173 ---
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 30:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
30:00 at RPE 5
15:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 174 ---
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 175 ---
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 4
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 176 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
8:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
8:00 at RPE 6, 15:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 5
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Relaxed Time Trial
--- PAGE 177 ---
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort, 1:00 rest
3 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
35:00 at RPE 5
--- PAGE 178 ---
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 179 ---
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:20:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 7
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 180 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
10K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (1 km at 10KP / 1:00 rest)
3 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 15:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 8
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
5K Pace Intervals
--- PAGE 181 ---
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 10KP / 1:00 rest)
3 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
16:00 at SSP
--- PAGE 182 ---
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 9
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at CV
Friday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 183 ---
Saturday
5K Race
Sunday
Rest
Level 3
This plan is designed for serious, competitive runners seeking the absolute
limit of their potential at the 5K distance. Before starting the plan, be sure
to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably able to run 9
times a week for up to 80 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
10KP 10K Pace
Week 1
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 184 ---
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
--- PAGE 185 ---
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 2
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
--- PAGE 186 ---
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
6:00 at LTP
3:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
35:00 at RPE 5
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 187 ---
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 188 ---
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 4
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 189 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 20:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 5
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
--- PAGE 190 ---
Relaxed Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 3 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort, 1:00 rest
4 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
12 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 191 ---
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
40:00 at RPE 5
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 192 ---
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 30:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
2:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 5–6
Week 7
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
--- PAGE 193 ---
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
10K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 3 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (1 km at 10KP / 1:00 rest)
4 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 194 ---
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
12:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
12:00 at RPE 6, 20:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 8
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 10KP / 1:00 rest)
3 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 195 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:05:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
16:00 at SSP
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 9
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 196 ---
Tuesday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at CV
Friday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
5K Race
Sunday
Rest
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 197 ---
10
10K Training Plans
The four training plans presented in this chapter are designed to help
runners master the art of pacing and find their limit at the 10K distance. The
various levels cover the needs of everyone from first-timers to elites. Refer
back to Chapter 6 for details on the RPE-based intensity scale used
throughout the plans and for full explanations of certain terms and workout
types. Online versions of the plans are available for separate purchase on
the 80/20 Endurance web site. Additionally, device-compatible free
versions of the individual workouts can be found at
https://www.8020endurance.com.
Level 0
This plan is appropriate for beginning runners preparing for their first 10K
event and for more experienced runners who need or prefer a relatively
low-volume training program for any reason. Before starting the plan, be
sure to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably able to run
5 days a week for up to 40 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
Week 1
--- PAGE 198 ---
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 199 ---
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 2
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 20:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
--- PAGE 200 ---
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:30 uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 201 ---
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
--- PAGE 202 ---
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 2:00 at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
--- PAGE 203 ---
Week 5
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 4:00 at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 204 ---
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:30 uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
--- PAGE 205 ---
6:00 at LTP
3:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 7
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (0.6 km at 5KP / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 206 ---
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
25:00 at RPE 5
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 8
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:45 at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 207 ---
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
12:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 9
Monday
--- PAGE 208 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
--- PAGE 209 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 10
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
--- PAGE 210 ---
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 4:00 at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 11
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 211 ---
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 at RPE 6 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
10K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (1 km at 10KP / 1:00 rest)
3 km at RPE 2–3
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 212 ---
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Rest
Thursday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 6–7
Friday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
10K Race
Sunday
Rest
Level 1
This plan is designed for runners who are ready to take their training load
up a notch in order to improve their 10K time. Before starting the plan, be
sure to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably able to run
6 days a week for up to 40 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
--- PAGE 213 ---
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
HMP Half-Marathon Pace
Week 1
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
--- PAGE 214 ---
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 2
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
--- PAGE 215 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
--- PAGE 216 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:30 uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
30 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
--- PAGE 217 ---
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 218 ---
12:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 5
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 219 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 4:00 at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 220 ---
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 20:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
6:00 at LTP
3:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 221 ---
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 7
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (0.6 km at 5KP / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
30:00 at RPE 5
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
--- PAGE 222 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 8
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 223 ---
Friday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
14:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
14:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 9
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
--- PAGE 224 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
30 × (0:30 at CV / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 10
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 225 ---
Tuesday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 4:00 at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
--- PAGE 226 ---
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
3 × (3 km at HMP / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Week 11
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
10K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (1 km at 10KP / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 227 ---
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Fast Finish Run
--- PAGE 228 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 6–7
Friday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
10K Race
Sunday
Rest
Level 2
This plan is a good fit for experienced competitive runners who are
prepared to train hard in pursuit of improved 10K performance. Before
starting the plan, be sure to build your training to the point where you’re
comfortably able to run 7 days a week for up to 70 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
HMP Half-Marathon Pace
Week 1
--- PAGE 229 ---
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
--- PAGE 230 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 2
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 231 ---
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:30 uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 232 ---
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
--- PAGE 233 ---
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 234 ---
6 × 4:00 at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
30:00 at RPE 5
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 5
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 235 ---
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
10K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (1 km at 10KP / 1:00 rest)
3 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Mini Intervals
10:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
40 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Speed Intervals
--- PAGE 236 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 20:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
6:00 at LTP
3:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
--- PAGE 237 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:20:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 7
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (0.6 km at 5KP / 1:00 rest)
3 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
3 × (3 km at HMP / 1:00 rest)
--- PAGE 238 ---
3 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 8
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 239 ---
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 4:00 at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
40:00 at RPE 5
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 9
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
--- PAGE 240 ---
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 241 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 10
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 242 ---
Friday
10K Relaxed Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
10 km at 95% effort
3 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
40 × (0:30 at CV / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 11
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP / 1:00 rest)
3 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
--- PAGE 243 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
10K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2 km at RPE 3–4
10 × (1 km at 10KP / 1:00 rest)
3 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 12
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 244 ---
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 6–7
Friday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
10K Race
Sunday
Rest
--- PAGE 245 ---
Level 3
This plan is designed for serious, competitive runners seeking the absolute
limit of their potential at the 10K distance. Before starting the plan, be sure
to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably able to run 9
times per week for up to 80 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
HMP Half-Marathon Pace
Week 1
Mondays
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
--- PAGE 246 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
--- PAGE 247 ---
Week 2
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
--- PAGE 248 ---
2:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:30 uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 249 ---
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 250 ---
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 2:00 at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 251 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 4:00 at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
40:00 at RPE 5
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 5
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
--- PAGE 252 ---
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration
3:00 acceleration
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
10K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 3 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (1 km at 10KP / 1:00 rest)
4 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
--- PAGE 253 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
50 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:45 at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 254 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 30:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
6:00 at LTP
3:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 7
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 255 ---
Tuesday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 3 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (0.6 km at 5KP / 1:00 rest)
4 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:05:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 3 km at RPE 3–4
3 × (3 km at HMP / 1:00 rest)
4 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 256 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 8
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
12 × 1:00 uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 257 ---
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:05:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 4:00 at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
50:00 at RPE 5
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Week 9
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 258 ---
Tuesday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration
3:00 acceleration
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 259 ---
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 10
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 260 ---
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
10K Relaxed Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 3 km at RPE 3–4
10 km at 95% effort, 4 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
50 × (0:30 at CV / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
20:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 261 ---
Week 11
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 3 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP / 1:00 rest)
4 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
10K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 3 km at RPE 3–4
10 × (1 km at 10KP / 1:00 rest)
4 km at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 262 ---
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 263 ---
Thursday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 6–7
Friday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
10K Race
Sunday
Rest
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 264 ---
11
Half-Marathon Training Plans
The four training plans presented in this chapter are designed to help
runners master the art of pacing and find their limit at the half-marathon
distance. The various levels cover the needs of everyone from first-timers to
elites. Refer back to Chapter 6 for details on the RPE-based intensity scale
used throughout the plans and for full explanations of certain terms and
workout types. Online versions of the plans are available for separate
purchase on the 80/20 Endurance web site. Additionally, device-compatible
free versions of the individual workouts can be found at
https://www.8020endurance.com.
Level 0
This plan is appropriate for beginning runners preparing for their first half-
marathon event and for more experienced runners who need or prefer a
relatively low-volume training program for any reason. Before starting the
plan, be sure to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably
able to run 5 days a week for up to 40 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
Week 1
--- PAGE 265 ---
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 266 ---
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 2
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 20:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Fartleks
--- PAGE 267 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
--- PAGE 268 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
--- PAGE 269 ---
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
--- PAGE 270 ---
Week 5
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
20 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 271 ---
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Speed Intervals
--- PAGE 272 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 7
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
12:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 273 ---
Thursday
Rest
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (0.6 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 8
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
30:00 at RPE 5
--- PAGE 274 ---
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:20:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 9
Monday
--- PAGE 275 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
--- PAGE 276 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 10
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
--- PAGE 277 ---
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 11
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
20 × (0:30 at CV / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 278 ---
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:40:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 30:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 279 ---
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
2:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
--- PAGE 280 ---
Week 13
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
14:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
14:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 281 ---
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 14
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
40:00 at RPE 5
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Relaxed 5K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort
--- PAGE 282 ---
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 15
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 283 ---
Rest
Friday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 6–7
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Race
Level 1
This plan is designed for runners who are ready to take their training load
up a notch in order to improve their half-marathon time. Before starting the
plan, be sure to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably
able to run 6 days a week for up to 1 hour.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
HMP Half-Marathon Pace
--- PAGE 284 ---
Week 1
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
--- PAGE 285 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 2
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 286 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 287 ---
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
--- PAGE 288 ---
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 289 ---
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 5
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
30 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 290 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:20:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 20:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
--- PAGE 291 ---
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 292 ---
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 7
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
14:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
14:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
--- PAGE 293 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 8
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
35:00 at RPE 5
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 294 ---
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
3 × (3 km at HMP / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Week 9
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 295 ---
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 296 ---
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 10
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
Saturday
--- PAGE 297 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:40:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 11
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
30 × (0:30 at CV / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 298 ---
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 30:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
2:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 299 ---
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 13
Monday
--- PAGE 300 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
16:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
16:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 301 ---
Sunday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
2 × (5 km at HMP / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Week 14
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
45:00 at RPE 5
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Relaxed 5K Time Trial
--- PAGE 302 ---
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 15
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 303 ---
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 6–7
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Race
Level 2
This plan is a good fit for experienced competitive runners who are
prepared to train hard in pursuit of improved half-marathon performance.
Before starting the plan, be sure to build your training to the point where
you’re comfortably able to run 7 days a week for up to 80 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
--- PAGE 304 ---
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
HMP Half-Marathon Pace
Week 1
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
--- PAGE 305 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 2
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
--- PAGE 306 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:20:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 307 ---
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:30 uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
--- PAGE 308 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 309 ---
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 5
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
40 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
15:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 310 ---
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:40:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 6
Monday
--- PAGE 311 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 312 ---
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:20:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 7
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
16:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
16:00 at RPE 6, 15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 313 ---
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
3.5 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
3 × (3 km at HMP / 1:00 rest)
3.5 km at RPE 2–3
Week 8
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
40:00 at RPE 5
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
--- PAGE 314 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 9
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 315 ---
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
--- PAGE 316 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
No calories before or during
Week 10
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 317 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
2 × (5 km at HMP / 1:00 rest)
3.5 km at RPE 2–3
Week 11
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
20:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 318 ---
20:00 at RPE 6, 15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 acceleration, 15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
2:05:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
--- PAGE 319 ---
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
40 × (0:30 at CV/ 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
12 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 320 ---
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
No calories before or during
Week 13
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Relaxed 10K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
10 km at 95% effort
3.5 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 321 ---
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
13 km at HMP
3.5 km at RPE 2–3
Week 14
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
50:00 at RPE 5
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
--- PAGE 322 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Relaxed 5K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 15
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 323 ---
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Race
--- PAGE 324 ---
Level 3
This plan was designed for serious competitive runners seeking the absolute
limit of their potential at the half-marathon distance. Before starting the
plan, be sure to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably
able to run 9 times per week for up to 80 minutes.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
HMP Half-Marathon Pace
MP Marathon Pace
Week 1
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 325 ---
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
--- PAGE 326 ---
Week 2
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 327 ---
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:30:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 328 ---
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
12 × 0:30 uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 329 ---
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:20:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 330 ---
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:50:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 5
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
50 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
--- PAGE 331 ---
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
11:00 acceleration, 20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 332 ---
Sunday
Marathon Pace Run
1 km (0.6 mile) at RPE 2–3, 2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 3–4
5 × 1.5 km (0.9 mile) at MP / 1.5 km (0.9 mile) at RPE 3–4
2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 2–3
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 30:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 333 ---
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:15:00 at RPE 3–4
No calories before or during
Week 7
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Tempo Run
--- PAGE 334 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
18:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
18:00 at RPE 6, 20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:05:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
5 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 335 ---
Sunday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
3 × (3 km at HMP / 1:00 rest)
5 km at RPE 2–3
Week 8
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
45:00 at RPE 5
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:05:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 336 ---
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
2:05:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 9
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 337 ---
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 338 ---
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:35:00 at RPE 3–4
No calories before or during
Week 10
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 339 ---
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
2 × (5 km at HMP / 1:00 rest)
5 km at RPE 2–3
Week 11
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 340 ---
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
22:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
22:00 at RPE 6, 20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 acceleration, 20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
--- PAGE 341 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
2:25:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
50 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 342 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
12 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:55:00 at RPE 3–4
No calories before or during
Week 13
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
--- PAGE 343 ---
Relaxed 10K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
10 km at 95% effort
5 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 344 ---
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
13 km at HMP
5 km at RPE 2–3
Week 14
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00:00 at RPE 5
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 345 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Relaxed 5K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort
5 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Endurance Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
5:00 at RPE 4–5
Week 15
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
--- PAGE 346 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Race
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 347 ---
12
Marathon Training Plans
The four training plans presented in this chapter are designed to help
runners master the art of pacing and find their limit at the marathon
distance. The various levels cover the needs of everyone from first-timers to
elites. Refer back to Chapter 6 for details on the RPE-based intensity scale
used throughout the plans and for full explanations of certain terms and
workout types. Online versions of the plans are available for separate
purchase on the 80/20 Endurance web site. Additionally, device-compatible
free versions of the individual workouts can be found at
https://www.8020endurance.com.
Level 0
This plan is appropriate for beginning runners preparing for their first
marathon event and for more experienced runners who need or prefer a
relatively low-volume training program for any reason. Before starting the
plan, be sure to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably
able to run 5 days a week for up to 10 km.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
Week 1
Monday
--- PAGE 348 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
--- PAGE 349 ---
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
8 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 2
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 20:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 350 ---
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
9 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 351 ---
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
8 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
20 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
--- PAGE 352 ---
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
11 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 5
Monday
--- PAGE 353 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
--- PAGE 354 ---
1 km at RPE 2–3
13 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 355 ---
6 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
11 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 7
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
35:00 at RPE 5
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 356 ---
Thursday
Rest
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
15 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 8
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 357 ---
12:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
17 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 9
Monday
--- PAGE 358 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
--- PAGE 359 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
13 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 10
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
20 × (0:30 at CV / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
--- PAGE 360 ---
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (0.6 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
19 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 11
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 361 ---
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (0.6 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
21 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 362 ---
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 363 ---
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
15 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 13
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
40:00 at RPE 5
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 364 ---
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
23 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 14
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
14:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
14:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 365 ---
Rest
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 Precision Splitting uphill at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
25 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 15
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
6:00 at LTP
3:00 at CV
--- PAGE 366 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
17 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 16
Monday
--- PAGE 367 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
50:00 at RPE 5
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
Relaxed 5K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
--- PAGE 368 ---
1 km at RPE 2–3
27 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 17
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Relaxed 10K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
10 km at 95% effort
2 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
--- PAGE 369 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
15 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 18
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Rest
Friday
--- PAGE 370 ---
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Race Day
Level 1
This plan is designed for runners who are ready to take their training load
up a notch in order to improve their marathon time. Before starting the plan,
be sure to build your training to the point where you’re comfortably able to
run 6 days a week for up to 12 km.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
MP Marathon Pace
Week 1
Monday
--- PAGE 371 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 372 ---
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
11 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 2
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 373 ---
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
13 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 374 ---
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
25:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
11 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
--- PAGE 375 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
30 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
--- PAGE 376 ---
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
15 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 5
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 377 ---
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
17 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
--- PAGE 378 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
30:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
11 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 7
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 379 ---
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
40:00 at RPE 5
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
--- PAGE 380 ---
1 km at RPE 2–3
19 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 8
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
14:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
14:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 381 ---
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
21 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 9
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 20:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
2:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 382 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
13 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 10
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
30 × (0:30 at CV/ 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
--- PAGE 383 ---
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
23 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
--- PAGE 384 ---
Week 11
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 385 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
25 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 386 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
15 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 13
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 387 ---
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
45:00 at RPE 5
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (0.6 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
2 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
--- PAGE 388 ---
1 km at RPE 2–3
27 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 14
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
14:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
14:00 at RPE 6, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Relaxed 5K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort
2 km at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 389 ---
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
29 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 15
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
6:00 at LTP
3:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 390 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
4 × 2:00 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
17 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 16
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
50:00 at RPE 5
--- PAGE 391 ---
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Marathon Pace Run
1 km (0.6 mile) at RPE 2–3, 2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 3–4
20 km (12.4 miles) at MP
2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 392 ---
Week 17
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Relaxed 10K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 1 km at RPE 3–4
10 km at 95% effort
2 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 393 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
15 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 18
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 5:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
10:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 394 ---
Friday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Race Day
Level 2
This plan is a good fit for experienced competitive runners who are
prepared to train hard in pursuit of improved marathon performance. Before
starting the plan, be sure to build your training to the point where you’re
comfortably able to run 7 days a week for up to 17 km.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
MP Marathon Pace
Week 1
--- PAGE 395 ---
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
--- PAGE 396 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
15 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 2
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 397 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
17 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
--- PAGE 398 ---
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
15 km at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 399 ---
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 4
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
40 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:30 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 400 ---
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
21 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 5
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 401 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
25 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 402 ---
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
--- PAGE 403 ---
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
17 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 7
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
45:00 at RPE 5
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 404 ---
6 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:55:00 at RPE 3–4
No calories before or during
Week 8
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
16:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
16:00 at RPE 6, 15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 405 ---
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
3.5 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Marathon Pace Run
1 km (0.6 mile) at RPE 2–3, 2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 3–4
6 × 1.5 km (0.9 mile) at MP / 1.5 km (0.9 mile) at RPE 3–4
2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 2–3
Week 9
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
--- PAGE 406 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
2:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
--- PAGE 407 ---
1 km at RPE 2–3
19 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 10
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
30 × (0:30 at CV / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
--- PAGE 408 ---
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
29 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 11
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 409 ---
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Marathon Pace Run
1 km (0.6 mile) at RPE 2–3, 2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 3–4
20 km (12.4 miles) at MP
2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 2–3
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
--- PAGE 410 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 411 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
2:15:00 at RPE 3–4
No calories before or during
Week 13
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
50:00 at RPE 5
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 412 ---
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (0.6 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
3.5 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
30 km at RPE 3–4
2 km at RPE 5–61
Week 14
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
20:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 6, 15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
--- PAGE 413 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Relaxed 5K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort
3.5 km at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
32 km at RPE 3–4
2 km at RPE 5–62
Week 15
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 414 ---
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
12:00 at SSP
6:00 at LTP
3:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
5 × 2:00 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 415 ---
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
2:35:00 at RPE 3–4
No calories before or during
Week 16
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
55:00 at RPE 5
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
--- PAGE 416 ---
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Marathon Pace Run
1 km (0.6 mile) at RPE 2–3, 2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 3–4
26 km (16.1 miles) at MP
2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 2–3
Week 17
Monday
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Relaxed 10K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 2.5 km at RPE 3–4
10 km at 95% effort
3.5 km at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 417 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
50:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
45:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
16 km at RPE 3–4
2 km at RPE 5–63
Week 18
Monday
Rest
--- PAGE 418 ---
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
35:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Race Day
--- PAGE 419 ---
Level 3
This plan is designed for runners seeking the absolute limit of their
potential at the marathon distance. Before starting the plan, be sure to build
your training to the point where you’re comfortably able to run 9 times per
week for up to 23 km.
SSP Steady-State Pace
LTP Lactate Threshold Pace
CV Critical Velocity
MAS Maximal Aerobic Speed
5KP 5K Pace
10KP 10K Pace
HMP Half-Marathon Pace
MP Marathon Pace
Week 1
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 420 ---
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
21 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
--- PAGE 421 ---
Week 2
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 40:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 422 ---
10 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
25 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 3
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 35:00 at RPE 3–4
8:00 at SSP
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
--- PAGE 423 ---
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 10:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:35:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 424 ---
No calories before or during
Week 4
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
50 × (0:30 at 10KP / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 425 ---
12 × 0:30 Precision Splitting uphill at RPE 8–9 / 1:30 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Half-Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
3 × (3 km at HMP / 1:00 rest)
5 km at RPE 2–3
Week 5
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 426 ---
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Accelerations
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
11:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
6:00 acceleration, 10:00 at RPE 2–3
11:00 acceleration, 20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
27 km at RPE 3–4
--- PAGE 427 ---
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 6
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 428 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
12 × 0:45 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 1:45 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:55:00 at RPE 3–4
No calories before or during
Week 7
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
--- PAGE 429 ---
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
50:00 at RPE 5
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:05:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
7 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 430 ---
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
30 km at RPE 3–4
2 km at RPE 5–64
Week 8
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
18:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
18:00 at RPE 6, 20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 431 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:05:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
6 × (0.8 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
5 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Marathon Pace Run
1 km (0.6 mile) at RPE 2–3, 2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 3–4
6 × 1.5 km (0.9 mile) at MP / 1.5 km (0.9 mile) at RPE 3–4
2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 2–3
Week 9
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
--- PAGE 432 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 40:00 at RPE 3–4
4:00 at LTP
2:00 at CV
1:00 at MAS
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals uphill at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
25:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 433 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
19 km at RPE 3–4
1 km at RPE 4–5
Week 10
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Mini Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
50 × (0:30 at CV / 0:30 at RPE 2–3)
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
--- PAGE 434 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
The Prefontaine
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
Go to failure × 200m at RPE 9 / 200m at RPE 6
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
30 km at RPE 3–4
2 km at RPE 5–65
Week 11
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
--- PAGE 435 ---
Critical Velocity Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
8 × 4:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 6–7 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 0:20 at RPE 8–9 / 1:40 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
35:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 436 ---
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Marathon Pace Run
1 km (0.6 mile) at RPE 2–3, 2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 3–4
20 km (12.4 miles) at MP
2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 2–3
Week 12
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
3:00 at SSP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
2:00 at LTP, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
1:00 at CV, 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
--- PAGE 437 ---
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
2:15:00 at RPE 3–4
No calories before or during
Week 13
--- PAGE 438 ---
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
1:00:00 at RPE 5
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
5K Pace Intervals
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
8 × (0.6 km at 5KP Precision Splitting / 1:00 rest)
5 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
--- PAGE 439 ---
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Marathon Pace Run
1 km at RPE 2–3, 15 km at RPE 3–4
16 km at MP
Week 14
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Tempo Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
22:00 at RPE 6, 5:00 at RPE 2–3
22:00 at RPE 6, 20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 440 ---
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Relaxed 5K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
5 km at 95% effort
5 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
32 km at RPE 3–4
2 km at RPE 5–66
Week 15
Monday
--- PAGE 441 ---
Rest
Tuesday
Progression Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 25:00 at RPE 3–4
16:00 at SSP
8:00 at LTP
4:00 at CV
5:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Hill Repetitions
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 Stretch Intervals at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
--- PAGE 442 ---
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Depletion Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
2:35:00 at RPE 3–4
No calories before or during
Week 16
Monday
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Steady-State Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
1:10:00 at RPE 5
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 443 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
1:10:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Speed Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 Stretch Intervals at RPE 8–9 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Marathon Pace Run
1 km (0.6 mile) at RPE 2–3, 2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 3–4
26 km (16.1 miles) at MP
2 km (1.2 miles) at RPE 2–3
Week 17
Monday
--- PAGE 444 ---
Recovery Run
40:00 at RPE 2–3
Tuesday
Relaxed 10K Time Trial
1 km at RPE 2–3, 4 km at RPE 3–4
10 km at 95% effort
5 km at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
VO2max Intervals
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
6 × 2:00 Precision Splitting at RPE 7–8 / 1:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 2–3
Recovery Run
30:00 at RPE 2–3
--- PAGE 445 ---
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
55:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Long Run with Fast Finish
1 km at RPE 2–3
16 km at RPE 3–4
2 km at RPE 5–67
Week 18
Monday
Rest
Tuesday
Fartleks
5:00 at RPE 2–3, 15:00 at RPE 3–4
10 × 1:00 at RPE 7–8 / 2:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
Wednesday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Thursday
Foundation Run
--- PAGE 446 ---
5:00 at RPE 2–3
40:00 at RPE 3–4
Friday
Fast Finish Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
20:00 at RPE 3–4
10:00 at RPE 6
Saturday
Foundation Run
5:00 at RPE 2–3
15:00 at RPE 3–4
Sunday
Race Day
1 Note the slightly more aggressive fast finish.
2 Note the slightly more aggressive fast finish.
3 Note the slightly more aggressive fast finish.
4 Note the slightly more aggressive fast finish.
5 Note the slightly more aggressive fast finish.
6 Note the slightly more aggressive fast finish.
7 Note the slightly more aggressive fast finish.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 447 ---
References
Albertus, Y., R. Tucker, A. St. Clair Gibson, E. V. Lambert, D. B. Hampson, and T. D.
Noakes. “Effect of Distance Feedback on Pacing Strategy and Perceived Exertion during
Cycling.” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 37, no. 3 (2005): 461–468.
Bassett, D. R., Jr. “Scientific Contributions of A. V. Hill: Exercise Physiology Pioneer.”
Journal of Applied Physiology 93, no. 5 (2002): 1567–1582.
https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.01246.2001.
Blanchfield, Anthony William, James Hardy, Helma Majella De Morree, Walter Staiano, and
Samuele Maria Marcora. “Talking Yourself Out of Exhaustion: The Effects of Self-Talk on
Endurance Performance.” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 46, no. 5 (2014): 998–
1007.
Borg, G. A. “Psychophysical Bases of Perceived Exertion.” Medicine & Science in Sports &
Exercise 14, no. 5 (1982): 377–381.
Boya, Manhal, Tom Foulsham, Florentina Hettinga, David Parry, Emily Williams, Hollie
Jones, Andrew Sparks, David Marchant, Paul Ellison, Craig Bridge, Lars McNaughton, and
Dominic Micklewright. “Information Acquisition Differences Between Experienced and
Novice Time Trial Cyclists.” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 49, no. 9
(September 2017): 1884–1898.
Brehm, J. W., and E. A. Self. “Intensity of Motivation.” Annual Review of Psychology 40
(1989): 109–131.
Brick, Noel, Mark J. Campbell, and Tadhg Macintyre. “Metacognitive Processes in the Self-
Regulation of Performance in Elite Distance Runners.” Psychology of Sport and Exercise
19 (February 2015): 1–9.
Chiang, Ted. Exhalation: Stories. New York: Vintage, 2019.
Cona, Giorgia, Annachiara Cavazzana, Antonio Paoli, Giuseppe Marcolin, Alessandro
Grainer, and Patrizia Silvia Bisiacchi. “It’s a Matter of Mind! Cognitive Functioning
Predicts the Athletic Performance in Ultra-marathon Runners.” PLOS One 10, no. 7 (July
2015): e0132943.
Corbett, J. “An Analysis of the Pacing Strategies Adopted by Elite Athletes During Track
Cycling.” International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance 4, no. 2 (2009):
195–205. https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.4.2.195.
Crawley, Michael. Out of Thin Air: Running Wisdom and Magic from Above the Clouds in
Ethiopia. London: Bloomsbury, 2020.
Crust, Lee, and Peter J. Clough. “Developing Mental Toughness: From Research to Practice.”
Journal of Sport Psychology in Action 2, no. 1 (2011): 21–32.
Demarie, S., J. R. Pycke, A. Pizzuti, and V. Billat. “Pacing Strategy of 800 m and 1500 m
Freestyle Swimming Finals in the World Championships According to the Performance in
Males and Females of Different Age Groups.” Applied Science 13 (2023): 10515.
de Morree, H. M., C. Klein, and S. M. Marcora. “Cortical Substrates of the Effects of
Caffeine and Time-on-Task on Perception of Effort.” Journal of Applied Physiology 117,
no. 12 (2014): 1514–1523. https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00898.2013.
--- PAGE 448 ---
Diotaiuti, Pierluigi, Stefania Mancone, and Stefano Corrado. “Using Sports Tracker:
Evidences on Dependence, Self-Regulatory Modes and Resilience in a Sample of
Competitive Runners.” Psychology 11, no. 1 (January 2020): 54–70.
do Carmo, Everton C., Renato Barroso, Andrew Renfree, Natalia R. da Silva, Saulo Gil, and
Valmor Tricoli. “Affective Feelings and Perceived Exertion During a 10-km Time Trial and
Head-to-Head Running Race.” International Journal of Sports Physiology and
Performance 11 (February 2020): 1–4.
Eaton, R. “Hunting Behaviour of the Cheetah.” Journal of Wildlife Management 34 (1970):
56–67.
Edwards, Andrew, and Remco Polman. Pacing in Sport and Exercise: A Psychophysiological
Perspective. New York: Nova, 2012.
Elbert, T., C. Pantev, C. Wienbruch, B. Rockstroh, and E. Taub. “Increased Cortical
Representation of the Fingers of the Left Hand in String Players.” Science 270, no. 5234
(October 1995): 305–307.
Elferink-Gemser, Marije T., and Florentina J. Hettinga. “Pacing and Self-Regulation:
Important Skills for Talent Development in Endurance Sports.” International Journal of
Sports Physiology and Performance 12, no. 6 (July 2017): 831–835.
Eskreis-Winkler, Lauren, James J. Gross, and Angela L. Duckworth. “Grit: Sustained Self-
Regulation in the Service of Superordinate Goals.” In Handbook of Self-Regulation:
Research, Theory and Applications, 3rd ed., edited by Kathleen D. Vohs and Roy F.
Baumeister. New York: Guilford, 2016.
Farrell, P. A., J. H. Wilmore, E. F. Coyle, J. E. Billing, and D. L. Costill. “Plasma Lactate
Accumulation and Distance Running Performance.” Medicine & Science in Sports &
Exercise 11, no. 4 (1979): 338–344.
García-González, Luis, M. Perla Moreno, Alberto Moreno, Alexander Gil, and Fernando del
Villar. “Effectiveness of a Video-Feedback and Questioning Programme to Develop
Cognitive Expertise in Sport.” PLOS One 8, no. 12 (2013): e82270.
Garcin, Murielle, Jérémy B. J. Coquart, Sophie Robin, and Régis Matran. “Prediction of Time
to Exhaustion in Competitive Cyclists from a Perceptually Based Scale.” Journal of
Strength and Conditioning Research 25, no. 5 (May 2011): 1393–1399.
Gendolla, Guido H. E., Mattie Tops, and Sandra L. Koole, eds. Handbook of Biobehavioral
Approaches to Self-Regulation. New York: Springer, 2015.
Gilpatrick, Brendan. “Pacing Variability and Performance in a 100 Mile Ultra Marathon.”
Digital Commons, 2021. https://digitalcommons.library.umaine.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?
article=4545&context=etd.
Haney, T. A., Jr., and J. A. Mercer. “A Description of Variability of Pacing in Marathon
Distance Running.” International Journal of Exercise Science 4, no. 2 (2011): 133–140.
Hill, A. V., C. H. N. Long, and H. Lupton. “Muscular Exercise, Lactic Acid and the Supply
and Utilisation of Oxygen: Parts I–III.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 96, no.
679 (1924): 438–475. https://www.jstor.org/stable/81203.
Hirsh, Jacob B. “Decision-Making and Self-Regulation from a Social-Personality
Neuroscience Perspective.” Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Toronto, 2010.
https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/bitstream/1807/32936/3/Hirsh_Jacob_B_20106_PhD_thes
is.pdf.
Karahanoğlu, Armagan, Rúben Gouveia, Jasper Reenalda, and Geke Ludden. “How Are
Sports-Trackers Used by Runners? Running-Related Data, Personal Goals, and Self-
Tracking in Running.” Sensors 21, no. 11 (2021): 3687.
--- PAGE 449 ---
Kirby, B. S., B. J. Winn, B. W. Wilkins, and A. M. Jones. “Interaction of Exercise
Bioenergetics with Pacing Behavior Predicts Track Distance Running Performance.”
Journal of Applied Physiology 131, no. 5 (2021): 1532–1542.
https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00223.2021.
Kolsung, E. B., G. Ettema, and K. Skovereng. “Physiological Response to Cycling with
Variable Versus Constant Power Output.” Frontiers in Physiology 11 (2020): 1098.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2020.01098.
Lambrick, Danielle, Alex Rowlands, Thomas Rowland, and Roger G. Eston. “Pacing
Strategies of Inexperienced Children During Repeated 800 m Individual Time-Trials and
Simulated Competition.” Pediatric Exercise Science 25, no. 2 (May 2013): 198–211.
Latorre-Román, Pedro Ángel, Juan Francisco Fernández-Povedano, Jesús Salas-Sánchez,
Felipe García-Pinillos, and Juan Antonio Párraga-Montilla. “The Ability of Runners to
Identify Spatial and Temporal Variables of Speed During Endurance Running.” Motor
Control 24, no. 4 (July 2020): 499–511.
Lee, Tatia M. C., Chetwyn C. H. Chan, Ada W. S. Leung, Peter T. Fox, and Jia-Hong Gao.
“Sex-Related Differences in Neural Activity During Risk Taking: An fMRI Study.”
Cerebral Cortex 19, no. 6 (June 2009): 1303–1312.
Le Meur, Y., T. Bernard, S. Dorel, C. R. Abbiss, G. Honnorat, J. Brisswalter, and C.
Hausswirth. “Relationships Between Triathlon Performance and Pacing Strategy During
the Run in an International Competition.” International Journal of Sports Physiology and
Performance 6, no. 2 (2011): 183–194. https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.6.2.183.
Liew, Guo Chen, Garry Kuan, Ngien Siong Chin, and Hairul Anuar Hashim. “Mental
Toughness in Sport.” German Journal of Exercise and Sport Research 49 (2019): 381–394.
Marcora, Samuele M. “Do We Really Need a Central Governor to Explain Brain Regulation
of Exercise Performance?” European Journal of Applied Physiology 104, no. 5 (November
2008): 929–931.
Marcora, Samuele M., Walter Staiano, and V. Manning. “Mental Fatigue Impairs Physical
Performance in Humans.” Journal of Applied Physiology 106, no. 3 (2009): 857–864.
https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.91324.2008.
Mauger, Alexis R., and Nick Sculthorpe. “A New VO2max Protocol Allowing Self-Pacing in
Maximal Incremental Exercise.” British Journal of Sports Medicine 46, no. 1 (January
2012): 59–63. https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2011-090006.
Méndez-Alonso, David, Jose Antonio Prieto-Saborit, Jose Ramón Bahamonde, and Estíbaliz
Jiménez-Arberás. “Influence of Psychological Factors on the Success of the Ultra-trail
Runner.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18, no. 5
(March 2021): 2704.
Molinari, C. A., P. Bresson, F. Palacin, and V. Billat. “Pace Controlled by a Steady-State
Physiological Variable Is Associated with Better Performance in a 3000 m Run.”
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18, no. 15 (2021):
7886. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18157886.
Morales-Alamo, David, José Losa-Reyna, Rafael Torres-Peralta, Marcos Martin-Rincon,
Mario Perez-Valera, David Curtelin, Jesús Gustavo Ponce-González, Alfredo Santana, and
José A. L. Calbet. “What Limits Performance during Whole-Body Incremental Exercise to
Exhaustion in Humans?” Journal of Physiology 593, no. 20 (October 2015): 4631–4648.
Murakami, Haruki. What I Talk About When I Talk About Running: A Memoir. New York:
Vintage, 2008.
--- PAGE 450 ---
Nikolaidis, Pantelis T., and Beat Knechtle. “Pacing in Age Group Marathoners in the ‘New
York City Marathon.’” Research in Sports Medicine 26, no. 1 (January–March 2018): 86–
99.
Noakes, T. D. “1996 J. B. Wolffe Memorial Lecture: Challenging Beliefs: Ex Africa semper
aliquid novi.” Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 29, no. 5 (1997): 571–590.
———. “Time to Move beyond a Brainless Exercise Physiology: The Evidence for Complex
Regulation of Human Exercise Performance.” Applied Physiology, Nutrition and
Metabolism 36, no. 1 (2011): 23–35. https://doi.org/10.1139/H10-082.
O’Leary, Thomas J., Johnny Collett, Ken Howells, and Martyn G. Morris. “High but Not
Moderate-Intensity Endurance Training Increases Pain Tolerance: A Randomised Trial.”
European Journal of Applied Physiology 117, no. 11 (November 2017): 2201–2210.
Olympics.com. “Sport and Education Are a Winning Combination.” Accessed February 6,
2024. https://olympics.com/athlete365/career/sport-and-education-are-a-winning-
combination/.
Parshad, R. D., S. J. McGregor, M. A. Busa, J. D. Skufca, and E. Bollt. “A Statistical
Approach to the Use of Control Entropy Identifies Differences in Constraints of Gait in
Highly Trained versus Untrained Runners.” Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering 9,
no. 1 (2012): 123–145. https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2012.9.123.
Pettersen, S. D., P. M. Aslaksen, and S. A. Pettersen. “Pain Processing in Elite and High-
Level Athletes Compared to Non-athletes.” Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020): 1908.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01908.
Scherr, Johannes, Bernd Wolfarth, Jeffrey W. Christle, Axel Pressler, Stefan Wagenpfeil, and
Martin Halle. “Associations Between Borg’s Rating of Perceived Exertion and
Physiological Measures of Exercise Intensity.” European Journal of Applied Physiology
113, no. 1 (January 2013): 147–155.
Scruton, Adrian, James Baker, Justin Roberts, Itay Basevitch, Viviane Merzbach, and Dan
Gordon. “Pacing Accuracy During an Incremental Step Test in Adolescent Swimmers.”
Open Access Journal of Sports Medicine 6 (2015): 249–257.
Seabury, T., D. Benton, and H. A. Young. “Interoceptive Differences in Elite Sprint and Long-
Distance Runners: A Multidimensional Investigation.” PLOS One 18, no. 1 (2023):
e0278067. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0278067.
Skorski, S., O. Faude, K. Rausch, and T. Meyer. “Reproducibility of Pacing Profiles in
Competitive Swimmers.” International Journal of Sports Medicine 34, no. 2 (February
2013): 152–157.
Smyth, Barry. “Fast Starters and Slow Finishers: A Large-Scale Data Analysis of Pacing at the
Beginning and End of the Marathon for Recreational Runners.” Journal of Sports Analytics
4, no. 3 (2018): 229–242.
Smyth, Barry, and Aonghus Lawlor. “Longer Disciplined Tapers Improve Marathon
Performance for Recreational Runners.” Frontiers in Sports and Active Living 3 (2021):
735220.
Viana, Bruno Ferreira, Flávio Oliveira Pires, Allan Inoue, Dominic Micklewright, and Tony
Meireles Santos. “Correlates of Mood and RPE During Multi-lap Off-Road Cycling.”
Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback 41, no. 1 (March 2016): 1–7.
Walsh, Vincent. “Is Sport the Brain’s Biggest Challenge?” Current Biology 24, no. 18 (2014):
R859–R860.
Weir, J. P., T. W. Beck, J. T. Cramer, and T. J. Housh. “Is Fatigue All in Your Head? A Critical
Review of the Central Governor Model.” British Journal of Sports Medicine 40, no. 7
--- PAGE 451 ---
(2006): 573–586.
Wiersma, Rikstje, Inge K. Stoter, Chris Visscher, Florentina J. Hettinga, and Marije T.
Elferink-Gemser. “Development of 1500-m Pacing Behavior in Junior Speed Skaters: A
Longitudinal Study.” International Journal of Sports Physiology and Performance 12, no.
9 (October 2017): 1224–1231.
Wiggins, Bradley. My Hour. London: Vintage, 2015.
Wittekind, A. L., D. Micklewright, and R. Beneke. “Teleoanticipation in All-Out Short-
Duration Cycling.” British Journal of Sports Medicine 45, no. 2 (2011): 114–119.
https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2009.061580.
OceanofPDF.com
--- PAGE 452 ---
About the Author
Matt Fitzgerald is an acclaimed endurance sports author, coach, and
nutritionist. His many books include Pain & Performance, The Comeback
Quotient, and 80/20 Running. Matt has also written for a number of leading
sports and fitness publications, including Runner’s World and Triathlete,
and for popular web sites such as outsideonline.com and nbcnews.com.
Matt is cofounder of 80/20 Endurance, the world’s premier endurance
sports training brand, where athletes can access training plans, videos, and
other invaluable resources and inspiration, including a regular 80/20
Endurance podcast and blog. He also codirects the Coaches of Color
Initiative, a nonprofit program that seeks to improve diversity in endurance
coaching.
A lifelong endurance athlete, Matt speaks frequently at events throughout
the United States and internationally and hosts Dream Run Camp, a
prostyle residential training camp for runners of all abilities based in
Flagstaff, Arizona.
OceanofPDF.com