
--- PAGE 2 ---
         

--- PAGE 3 ---
Contents
Title Page
Dedication
Acknowledgments
Foreword
Introduction: Every Runner Needs (to Be) a Coach
1. Adaptive Running
2. Adaptive Running Methods
3. Aerobic-Support Training
4. Muscle Training
5. Specific-Endurance Training
6. Self-Assessment
7. Creating a Training Plan
8. Training Execution
9. Improving from Year to Year
10. The Self-Coaching Journey
11. Adaptive Running for Youth and Masters Runners
--- PAGE 4 ---
12. Adaptive Training Plans
Footnote
Copyright
--- PAGE 5 ---
To the Athletes
--- PAGE 6 ---
Acknowledgments
Although only two names appear on the cover, this book wouldn’t be
what it is without vital contributions from the following people, to
whom we offer our most heartfelt thanks: Jo Ankier, Jonathon
Beverly, Nic Bideau, Bill Bowerman, Casey Burchill, Renato Canova,
James Carney, Stacy Creamer, Alan Culpepper, Shayne Culpepper,
Bill Dellinger, Donavon Guyot, Jason Hartmann, Lucinda Hull,
Christy Johnson, Jeff Johnson, Weldon Johnson, Linda Konner,
Megan Lewis, Kelly Liljeblad, Dathan Ritzenhein, Kalin Ritzenhein,
Stephanie Rothstein, Victor Sailor, Sarah Schwald, Andy Smith,
Sarah Toland, Edwardo Torres, Jorge Torres, Alison Wade, Toby
Warden, Mark Wetmore, and Mary Wittenberg.
--- PAGE 7 ---
Foreword
Congratulations. By purchasing this book you are taking advantage
of a remarkable opportunity: to learn not just to coach yourself but to
coach yourself the way Brad Hudson would if you were a world-class
runner under his care. What sets Brad’s program apart is its
responsiveness to the individual. Rather than relying on cookie-
cutter regimens with weeks of prescribed mileage and workouts set
in stone, Brad sees how a runner is responding to the training before
he decides what the next step should be. And now, armed with the
information between these covers, you’ll be able to make similar
assessments for yourself. The best runner is an educated runner.
         
Here at New York Road Runners we believe in changing the world
for the better, and enriching and enhancing the lives of individuals of
all ages and abilities through running. Our efforts range from
organizing weekly local races for thousands of runners, to our NYRR
Foundation programs, which currently bring running and fitness to
more than forty thousand schoolchildren every day in New York City
and beyond. We attempt to win people over to the benefits of
running—person by person. We know how good running is for
people in so many ways. We also know the compelling satisfaction
that improvement in running brings. I am happy for you that, with this
book, you are on the road to such improvement and satisfaction.
         
--- PAGE 8 ---
Running is hard. No question about it. It gets easier as one gets
fitter, and it also gets to be more fun. This is true for all people—from
the very best in the world to the rest of us. The best in the world, like
American star Dathan Ritzenhein, Central Park 10K record holder
and member of the USA Olympic Marathon team headed to Beijing,
are extra talented and work really hard, but they also have some
advantages over mere mortals like the rest of us. Some have world-
class coaches to support them in their efforts to get fitter and faster.
Dathan and his teammates are especially fortunate. They have the
benefit of the attention and effort of one of the smartest, hardest-
working, most intense coaches in the business, a young man who
learned by doing and studying. Coach Brad Hudson leaves no stone
unturned in his quest to help his athletes thrive. He’s part engineer,
part mathematician, part scientist, and part psychologist. Brad is one
of those people who pours his heart and soul and mind into what he
does. Lucky for our sport, Brad has chosen to coach long-distance
running. Now, lucky for you, Brad has translated his learning and
teachings into lessons and guidance for everyone.
         
I remember my first chat with Brad well. It was several years ago in a
running store in Boulder, Colorado. I had heard much of this young
legend in running, and the moment I met him, I was drawn in by his
intense passion for coaching his athletes. I barely knew the guy, but
he chewed my ear for an hour on the science of coaching and his
expectations for Dathan Ritzenhein to ace the marathon at an early
age. He was buoyed by the challenge of getting the then injury-prone
Ritzenhein to the start line strong and healthy. Working with Dathan,
Brad has now done that repeatedly.
         
He’s now taking the show on the road to your home. Good for you.
Enjoy the read and the ride. Run smart and hard and enjoy the
--- PAGE 9 ---
satisfaction of the journey…all the more satisfying with Brad.
         
I wish you the very best of luck with your training. And I hope we’ll
see you at a New York Road Runners race sometime soon.
Mary Wittenberg
President & CEO
New York Road Runners
--- PAGE 10 ---
Introduction: Every Runner Needs (to Be) a
Coach
My life as a runner started with an amazing stroke of good luck.
When I was 9 years old, I joined a newly created community running
program called “Run for Fun” that was based in my New Jersey
hometown. The coach of that program was Mark Wetmore, then a
student at Rutgers University, who went on to become the legendary
multiple national championship–winning coach of the University of
Colorado track and cross-country teams. That’s like a musically
inclined third-grader taking his first piano lessons from a young
Beethoven.
Running appealed to me right from the start, not only because I
had a great coach but also because I liked the individual nature of
running and because, well, I was really good at it. Back then I was
still playing soccer, which was my first sport. One day at practice we
ran a one-mile race and I finished second against a group of kids
who were mostly two and three years older than I was. In that
moment I realized I should probably leave the ball alone and focus
on running, and thereafter I did.
At a very early point in my running life I became totally obsessed
with the art and science of training, so I read every relevant piece of
material I could get my hands on—magazines, training manuals,
biographies and autobiographies, you name it. By age 13 I had read
more about running than many college-level coaches have. At the
same time, I was applying my rapidly growing pool of knowledge in
training for road races, open track meets, and school events.
--- PAGE 11 ---
When I entered high school I started training even harder. I
remember reading a book called How They Train, which detailed the
workouts of the great high school runners of the ’60s, like Gerry
Lindgren. The one thing these guys all had in common was that they
logged copious mileage, so I thought it was normal to run a lot.
Before long I was running more than 100 miles a week myself.
In my junior year of high school I became an emancipated minor—
my own legal guardian. I took advantage of my independence to
relocate across the country to the running mecca of Eugene,
Oregon. By then I was the reigning New Jersey state champion in
cross-country. The following year I became the Oregon state cross-
country champion and finished third in the National Championship.
These results were good enough to earn me a scholarship from the
University of Oregon, where I became a two-time All-American in
cross-country and track and field.
I ran professionally for ten years after college. My best marathon
time was 2:13, which I achieved twice. I qualified for the Olympic
Trials three times and won the Columbus Marathon on two
occasions. While most competitive runners would be more than
satisfied with such accomplishments, I believe I was capable of
much more. As a teenager I was breaking national records, but at
the elite level I never even qualified for an Olympic team. The
problem was that I overtrained consistently for many years and wore
my body down. I was also stubbornly self-reliant, hence
uncoachable, and ignored a lot of good advice from others that could
have helped me perform better.
Toward the end of my career, as I began to see my mistakes
clearly, I found myself thinking more and more about what I should
have done differently in my training, the changes I would make in my
development as a runner if I could do it all over again, and what sort
of advice I would offer to today’s young runners, if given the
opportunity, to help them avoid repeating my mistakes and thus
achieve their full potential. In short, I started thinking like a coach.
--- PAGE 12 ---
Born to Coach
I now believe that coaching is what I was really born to do. I used
to think I had been born to run, but looking back I see that, as much
as I loved running throughout my career, my passion for the craft of
training was even greater. In other words, I liked coaching myself
even more than I enjoyed running. My current situation as the head
coach of an elite running team is thus ideal for me, because I am
able to practice and develop the craft of training with several great
athletes simultaneously.
The first runner I coached was Sarah Toland, who qualified for the
World Cross Country Championships while I was working with her.
During that period Sarah did a few of my workouts with her friend
and fellow elite runner Shayne Culpepper. Impressed by Sarah’s
sudden improvement, Shayne later asked me to coach her. By that
time I had also begun advising Steve Slattery, a steeplechaser who
won a national championship with the help of some of my
suggestions. When Shayne won the Olympic Trials at 5,000 meters
the next year, a lot of other top runners began to take notice of what I
was doing and approached me to ask what I could do for them.
Before I knew it I was a full-time coach.
--- PAGE 13 ---
Sarah Toland © Alison Wade
In 2004, I created the Boulder Performance Training Group, a
team of world-and national-class runners who train together under
my direction. We’ve since moved to Eugene, Oregon, and shortened
our name to the Performance Training Group. My best-known athlete
is Dathan Ritzenhein, who won two National Cross Country
Championships in high school and one in college and has won
several big races as a professional. I am regularly forced to turn
away talented runners who want to join Dathan and the others on my
team, because I put so much individual time and energy into each
runner that I really couldn’t handle any more without sacrificing my
standards.
When I started coaching, I thought that the most valuable service I
would provide my runners would be to share the rich store of training
--- PAGE 14 ---
knowledge I had accumulated in my head. But I have since
discovered that the athletes I coach don’t really need me for my
knowledge of training. Ironically, they need me above all to help
them gain knowledge of themselves as runners, because therein lies
the true key to getting faster.
There are two classic mistakes that competitive runners make in
their training, and both stem from an underlying failure to gather and
apply self-knowledge. Mistake number one is to follow someone
else’s recipe for success instead of developing one’s own best
recipe for success based on one’s individual strengths, weaknesses,
needs, and goals. Mistake number two is to guide one’s training too
much by plans and not enough by the way one’s body responds to
planned training. I made both of these mistakes in my own running
career. Blindly mimicking the over-the-top training habits of Gerry
Lindgren and others, as I did in my teens, is a good example of
mistake number one. My entire professional running career was a
protracted case of mistake number two, as I refused to face the fact
that my ill-fitting training patterns were destroying my body.
Without proper guidance, nearly every competitive runner commits
these mistakes to some degree, as I did. Runners are always willing
to work hard, but most of them have a certain lazy streak that
prevents them from doing the mental work that is needed to properly
customize their training and adjust it responsively day by day.
Therefore my biggest job as a coach is not to show my runners the
one true path to faster race times but is instead to help them
discover their own, unique, ever-changing road to improvement.
The Importance of Customization
The most valuable resource that a coach can offer a competitive
runner is simply another perspective. Because a coach works with
many different runners, he’s likely to have a better sense of the
individual needs of each runner. One of the most important lessons I
--- PAGE 15 ---
learned when I began coaching several runners simultaneously is
how different each runner truly is. There are a great many variables,
including running experience; training history; relative speed,
strength, and endurance; injury patterns; recovery capacity; and
others that combine to make each individual runner unique. For this
reason, the ideal training approach for each runner is also unique.
No two runners should train in precisely the same way.
A runner who has more natural speed than natural endurance
should not train for a half-marathon the same way as a runner with
more natural endurance than speed, even if the two runners have
the same goal time. Similarly, a runner with one year of competitive
experience should not train for a marathon the same way as a
runner with twelve years of competitive experience, even if both
runners share the same goal time and are the same age. These are
just a couple of examples of the need for training customization that
is unmet for most self-coached runners, who are never taught the
importance of customizing one’s training in such ways.
Fortunately for me, and for my runners, my insatiable curiosity
about training methods has put me in a good position to find the right
methods for each runner I work with. Many coaches are locked into a
system, which is usually a modified version of the system they were
taught by their own most influential coach, and they in turn apply this
system to every runner they train, regardless of how each athlete
responds to it. But my situation is different, because I had no single
coaching mentor; instead, for the past three decades and more I
have aggressively sought out and studied, absorbed, and tested
every training system on earth that has produced positive results
with competitive runners. As a preteen I personally met and picked
the brain of the great Arthur Lydiard of New Zealand, who
established the foundation of modern endurance training methods. I
have since learned at the feet of dozens of other great coaches,
including my former coach at the University of Oregon, Bill Dellinger,
as well as Renato Canova of Italy, Steve Moneghetti of Australia,
and many others. Having been exposed to such a wealth and variety
--- PAGE 16 ---
of training systems, I now have a bulging bag of tricks I can draw
from in developing well-customized training programs for each
runner I coach.
One major advantage of trying out all kinds of different training
methods is that it gives you a chance to compare them against one
another. You never know if there’s a better way of doing things if you
keep on doing things the way you’ve always done them. In the
process of testing various training practices, I have found that many
conventional training methods simply do not work as well as
alternative methods that are newer or less well known. As a result,
each new runner I take on is exposed to at least one training method
he or she has never used before.
The Need to Train Responsively
The key to avoiding the second common mistake related to self-
knowledge that most self-coached runners make—that of not
listening to their bodies—is what I call “training responsively.” In my
own running career I had to learn the hard way that the details of any
runner’s next workout should be informed 90 percent by how he or
she feels after today’s workout and only 10 percent by the training
plan that was created before the training process actually began. So
now, as a coach to other runners, I train my athletes from workout to
workout instead of from training plan to training plan as I did with
myself. Neither my athletes nor I know exactly what they will do in
the next workout until we’ve assessed the state of their bodies after
the most recently completed workout.
Training plans are valuable, and I do create long-term training
plans for my athletes, each culminating in the individual runner’s next
“peak” race. But I always bear in mind that these plans necessarily
make a lot of assumptions about how the runners will actually
progress along the path laid out for them. For the most part, training
plans represent best-case scenarios, such that, if everything goes
--- PAGE 17 ---
perfectly, the runner will be able to do all of the important workouts
exactly as they are planned. But nothing ever goes perfectly.
Unexpected periods of fatigue crop up, muscle and joint pains
emerge, and illnesses occur. Sometimes, certain components of a
runner’s fitness develop more slowly or even faster than expected. In
either case, the workout that will do the best job of keeping the
runner on track toward his or her long-term goal is not always the
workout I had scheduled for that day when I sat down to map out a
plan several weeks earlier.
For this reason, I plan every workout in pencil (literally and
figuratively) and make a final decision about the workout at the last
minute. My runners often grumble about replacing planned hard
workouts with lighter ones when I determine it’s necessary. And I am
certain that in most cases they would go ahead and do the planned
workout—usually with bad consequences—if I were not around. This
is just the way runners are. It is very difficult for the typical
competitive runner to truly accept the idea that backing off can be
beneficial for performance. This is one reason why I believe that
every runner needs to have a good coach—or learn to be a good
self-coach.
If You Can’t Have a Coach, Be a Coach
Every coach has some kind of training system, but the better
coaches do not apply their system in the same way with every
runner they work with one-on-one. Instead, they create a new,
unique, highly customized training plan for each runner based on
that runner’s specific running experience, fitness level, and
ambitions. The best coaches also watch their athletes very closely to
assess how they are responding to workouts and stay ready and
open to making quick adjustments—usually small ones but
sometimes large—to keep their athletes on track toward their goals.
It’s hard work, I assure you, but these efforts to gain, share, and
--- PAGE 18 ---
apply knowledge of each runner do more to help runners improve
than any “system” does.
Most runners, of course, do not have the luxury of working face-to-
face with a good coach every day. To achieve their goal of running
faster in races, self-coached runners must find a way to become
their own coach—to do for themselves what good coaches do for
their athletes. Specifically, they need to learn how to create their own
customized training plans that fit their individual needs, and how to
tweak their training wisely from workout to workout based on how
their body responds to the plan. I truly believe that learning and
applying these self-coaching skills will have a greater impact on your
race times than any new workout you might try or any new one-size-
fits-all training plan you might find in a book or magazine. The truth is
that any solid training system will eventually become the perfect
training system for you if you continually customize and refine it
using these self-coaching skills.
I love helping runners become faster. I get such a kick out of it that
a part of me wishes I could coach every competitive runner in the
entire world who has an earnest desire to improve. I wrote this book
as the next best alternative. There are a lot of good running books
out there that teach effective workouts and present solid training
systems. But a lack of effective workouts and solid training systems
is not the primary obstacle to your running faster. The primary
obstacle to your running faster is a lack of self-knowledge and self-
observation used specifically to customize your training methods and
make smart adjustments to your training as it proceeds. In short,
what’s holding you back is the unfulfilled need for a second
perspective—a coaching perspective—that helps put your training on
track and keep it on track.
The purpose of this book is to teach you the tools you need to
become your own best coach so that you can train better and run
faster. Learning and applying these skills will require you to put more
thought into your training than you may be accustomed to, and to
--- PAGE 19 ---
pay closer attention to yourself as a runner. But, ultimately,
mastering the craft of self-coaching will make your running more
enjoyable and fulfilling, as well as just plain better.
I will start in chapter 1 by giving you an overview of my no-
system/every-system training philosophy, which my friend and the
coauthor of this book, Matt Fitzgerald, has dubbed “adaptive
running.” The term fits, because adaptation is the essence of my
training philosophy. The goal of training, as I see it, is to stimulate
the precise set of physiological adaptations that are needed to
achieve maximal performance in a peak race. To achieve this
objective, your training plan must be adapted based on your
knowledge of yourself as a runner. Your individualized training
schedule must then be adapted daily based on your response to
recent training and any other factors that may affect your readiness
for planned training. And finally, you must adapt your training from
season to season, year to year, in response to the effects of the
most recently completed training cycle (i.e., a period of training
culminating in a peak race), to stimulate further positive adaptations
that will help you continually develop and mature as a runner.
In chapter 2, I will present the 12 most effective training methods I
have found among the hundreds I have learned and tried. These 12
practices represent the foundation for creating customized training
plans. Chapters 3 through 5 cover the three basic types of training in
the adaptive training system: aerobic-support training, muscle
training, and specific-endurance training.
In chapters 6 through 9, we will really get down to the business of
adaptation, covering the topics of how to assess your needs,
strengths, and weaknesses and set goals; how to plan a fully
customized training cycle; how to execute your training responsively;
and how to adapt your training for year-to-year improvement.
Chapter 10 ties everything together to prepare you for your self-
coaching journey, and chapter 11 treats the special topic of
--- PAGE 20 ---
customizing the adaptive training system to the needs of youth and
masters runners.
Finally, in chapter 12, I will present a selection of training plans for
each of four race distances: 5K, 10K, half-marathon, and marathon.
These plans will help you get started with the adaptive approach to
training and the process of becoming an effective self-coach. Just
choose the plan that best fits your needs and use the tools you’ve
learned in the rest of the book to further customize it and adjust it
day by day. Before long, you will achieve a higher level of mastery
over your development as a runner and you will run faster than you
ever have before.
--- PAGE 21 ---
Adaptive Running 1
         
Every elite running coach has a training philosophy. Mine is called
adaptive running. It is based on my belief that a responsive,
evolving, creative approach to training is better than an approach
that is too structured and formulaic. Simply put, there is no single
training formula that works perfectly for every runner. Nor is it
possible to predict exactly how a runner will respond to any particular
training formula. What’s more, even when a certain formula works
well for a runner, he or she changes as a result of using it, so the
formula must also change to produce further improvement. For these
reasons, a rigid, one-size-fits-all training program will never allow
you to realize your full potential as a runner. It may get you started,
but it will only take you so far. Adaptive running becomes the natural
way to train when you recognize that training must be customized to
you individually and adapted every day based on your response to
recent training.
My experience in coaching and advising a pair of elite runners—
who also happen to be a married couple—provides a good
illustration of why an adaptive approach to running is necessary. A
few years ago, Shayne Culpepper, a 5,000-meter specialist, asked
--- PAGE 22 ---
me to help her qualify for the 2004 Olympics. Shayne fared so well
off the program I created for her (which you can read about in
chapter 4) that her husband, Alan Culpepper, also an elite runner,
decided to copy parts of it. The problem was that Alan was a
completely different type of runner from Shayne. Alan has muscles
that contain a lot of slow-twitch fibers; he’s designed for endurance
more than speed. Shayne, on the other hand, has a lot more fast-
twitch fibers. Speed comes naturally to her. The training program I
gave Shayne was specifically designed for a 5,000-meter runner with
a lot of speed. It was not designed for a marathoner who’s all slow-
twitch, like Alan. Consequently, when he borrowed some of Shayne’s
training, Alan did not get the dramatic fitness and performance boost
Shayne had gotten. Instead, he quickly became fatigued and his
fitness stagnated. He tried to ignore these warning signs and push
through, but the situation only worsened. Eventually, he went back to
his old system, having set back his seasonal development by many
weeks.
The moral of this story is twofold. First, it points to the fact that no
two runners are the same. If you give two runners the same training
program, they will get very different results, even if they are runners
of similar ability. Alan’s initial mistake was to assume that what
worked for Shayne would work for him. Second, my experience with
Shayne and Alan Culpepper demonstrates that runners must train
responsively, modifying their training based on how recent training
has affected their bodies. Alan’s biggest mistake was to persist in
training Shayne’s way even though it clearly wasn’t working for him.
Alan is actually one of the smartest self-coached runners I know, so
you can be sure that if he’s making these kinds of mistakes, most
competitive runners are.
--- PAGE 23 ---
Alan Culpepper © Bill Hook
There are plenty of coaches and runners who understand that no
two runners are the same, and that runners must adjust their training
based on how they are currently feeling and performing. Yet very few
coaches and runners view these realities as major considerations in
the planning and execution of a training program. The typical running
coach customizes the training plans he prescribes in terms of
volume (miles per week), but that’s about the extent of it. The rest is
formulaic. Likewise, the typical competitive runner modifies her
training when an injury occurs or in cases of significant fatigue, but
fails to modify her training in response to subtler “surprises” (e.g.,
feeling unexpectedly flat on the day of a planned key workout) in the
way her body responds to planned training.
The difference between my training philosophy—adaptive running
—and the more typical approach to training is that I view these two
--- PAGE 24 ---
lessons (first, that no two runners are the same, and second, that
every runner must train responsively) of Alan Culpepper’s
experience as central to the planning and execution of training. I
believe that there are many more factors besides the amount of
running mileage a particular runner can handle that must be taken
into account when creating an individually customized training plan. I
also believe that planned training should be adjusted not only when
major setbacks occur, but almost daily, based on a complete
assessment of the runner’s immediate training needs. In other
words, I believe that every workout should be planned in pencil, not
ink.
Imagine a spectrum that ranges from one-size-fits-all training
plans at one end and made-from-scratch plans for each runner at the
other end. The typical approach to training is closer to the one-size-
fits-all end of the spectrum. Adaptive running is closer to the made-
from-scratch end of the spectrum. Of course, there isn’t a coach or
runner in his right mind who believes that there is truly a single
training plan that can work for every runner. Nor do I believe it makes
any sense to reinvent the wheel of training for each runner. But there
is a big difference between the amount of customization that the
typical coach does in planning a runner’s training and the amount of
customization I do for my runners and recommend for self-coached
runners like you.
Now imagine another spectrum that ranges from strict adherence
to planned training at one end to total spontaneity at the other end.
The typical competitive runner trains in fairly strict adherence to the
plan, and with fairly little spontaneity. If the training plan calls for 12
quarter-mile repeats in 80 seconds apiece on Thursday, then by
God, he’s going to run 12 quarter-mile repeats in 80 seconds apiece
on Thursday, even if he feels awful from the very first step of the
workout. My approach to training encourages far more spontaneity—
not arbitrary changes to the plan, but informed changes based on
how the runner has responded to recent training. Naturally, there
isn’t a runner on earth who is completely unwilling to deviate from
--- PAGE 25 ---
planned workouts. I don’t advocate a make-it-up-as-you-go
approach, but I do put far more emphasis on reaction and less
emphasis on planning than the typical competitive runner does.
Every competitive runner trains with the objective of achieving
peak-race goals. Conventional training and adaptive running are
both oriented toward this objective. The difference, in my view, is that
adaptive running is a more reliable way to get from point A to point
B, because it entails planning the route that’s best for each
individual’s starting place and is open to taking all kinds of helpful
“detours” around unexpected obstacles along the way. In the
following pages, I will give you a general overview of my adaptive
running system. Subsequent chapters will provide detailed
information on how to practice adaptive running in the way that
works best for you.
Adaptive running is based on two rules and four principles. The
purpose of the “Two Rules of Running” explained in the next section
is to simplify the conceptual side of training as much as possible.
These two rules are not specific to adaptive running but are truly
universal: Every training system must adhere to them to be effective.
In my experience, most runners fail to practice both rules as well as
they should. I certainly broke them many times in my competitive
days. The four principles of adaptive running discussed in the final
section of this chapter represent my understanding of the best way
to practice the two fundamental rules of running.
Perhaps all of this talk of rules and principles strikes you as being
a bit too theoretical and not terribly practical. But the fact of the
matter is that it’s very important for you to get a solid mental grasp of
adaptive running before you begin trying to practice it. This is
because practicing adaptive running effectively requires that you
take charge of your development as a runner in a way that you
probably haven’t before. It will oblige you to make independent
decisions and solve unique problems. Simply put, it will require you
—and enable you—to become your own coach. I promise you that
--- PAGE 26 ---
having a solid grasp of the universal rules of running and the
principles of adaptive running will help you in these situations even
more than the detailed guidelines on how to practice adaptive
running that you’ll find in subsequent chapters.
The Two Rules of Running
Effective training can be boiled down to two simple rules. If you
fully understand these rules, then adaptive running begins to make a
lot of sense. And if you obey them, you will be successful as a
runner. Rule one is this: Understand how the human body adapts to
different types of training, and train accordingly—that is, do what
works and avoid doing what doesn’t work. Rule two is as follows:
Learn how your individual body adapts to various types of training,
and train accordingly—that is, do what works for you, and avoid
doing what doesn’t work for you, even if this means that you do
things differently than most other runners do. Let’s take a closer look
at each of these rules.
Rule #1:
Understand how the human body adapts to different types of
training, and train accordingly.
As I suggested above, training must be customized to the
individual runner, but it doesn’t need to be reinvented for every
runner. Despite our many genetic and situational differences, we’re
all human, and our similarities really outweigh our differences. So we
respond similarly to various types of training stimuli. Every runner
builds greater endurance by doing longer runs. Every runner
develops greater aerobic capacity by doing high-intensity intervals.
No runner can run to exhaustion every day without becoming injured
or overtrained. And so forth.
--- PAGE 27 ---
The sports of modern distance running, cross-country running, and
track and field are a little more than a century old. Over the past
eleven or twelve decades, runners and coaches have tried all kinds
of training methods, with varying degrees of success. Methods that
seemed to yield good results were repeated and imitated. Those that
did not were usually abandoned. Contemporary training methods
represent a collection of “best practices” that have survived the test
of time. The general methods used by expert coaches and
experienced competitive runners are proven to work well for every
runner, as long as they are appropriately adapted to the individual.
Making an effort to learn, understand, and base your training on our
sport’s “best practices” will give you the most solid possible
foundation for success. It would take you more than a hundred years
to find them on your own by trial and error.
Having said this much, I must add that it’s also important to
analyze conventional training methods with a skeptical eye, because
there are some common practices that don’t make a heck of a lot of
sense under close scrutiny. For example, even in this enlightened
age it is still common for marathon runners to use short intervals
such as 400-meter repeats to “sharpen up” for a marathon in the
final weeks of training. If you think about it, that’s a bit like a 400-
meter track specialist using 20-mile runs to “sharpen up” for a
championship 400-meter race. Key sharpening workouts are most
effective when they closely simulate the speed and endurance
demands of your race. Thus, a fast 20-mile run is a better marathon
sharpening workout than a set of short intervals at 3,000-meter race
pace on the track. This may sound commonsensical, but many
distance runners train as though the thought has never crossed their
minds.
A lot of runners and coaches also make the mistake of assuming
we know all we need to know about how the human body responds
to training, so there’s no point in trying to innovate. But I believe that
effective training innovations are still possible. I spend as much time
as any running coach on earth picking the brains of other top
--- PAGE 28 ---
coaches and runners, studying all of the latest relevant exercise
physiology literature, and making various other efforts to uncover
new methods worth trying. This never-ending quest for fresh
practical knowledge has led me to incorporate several unusual
features into my adaptive running system that have proven beneficial
for my athletes and would also be beneficial to most other runners.
These methods include the use of very short, very steep, very fast
hill sprints to build strength and power, and incorporating race-pace
training throughout the training cycle, from the beginning of the
introductory period straight through to the end of the sharpening
period.
Adaptive running is the product of my exposure to a wide variety of
training methods as a runner and as a student of the sport, my
skeptical appraisal of even the most widely practiced methods, and
my experimentation with unusual practices that seemed worth a try
and proved useful. While customization, responsiveness, and
evolution are major elements of adaptive running, my system also
incorporates a number of standard practices that I consider the best
of the best, based on my cumulative experience. Even though I train
each of my runners uniquely on the level of details, on a general
level there are certain characteristics that each runner’s training
shares with the others. These general characteristics represent the
training methods that I have found to be beneficial for every runner,
and therefore to be essential characteristics of any successful
training program. There are 12 such general characteristics of my
training method, which I will discuss in detail in chapter 2. I want you
to learn and apply them all in your training, at least to start with, but
you must adapt them to your individual needs, and you must not
hesitate to move away from one or more of them in certain ways as
you develop and learn more about what really works best for you.
Let me be clear: It’s impossible to draw a clear line that marks
where the universal human responses to training practices end and
individual responses begin. There is plenty of disagreement even
among the most experienced coaches and runners concerning which
--- PAGE 29 ---
training methods truly represent the best practices that every runner
should apply. Yet quite a lot is known about how the human body
responds to different types of training. Learning about these cause-
and-effect relationships is an indispensable shortcut to better
running. Again, you will learn my take on these relationships, in the
form of the 12 characteristics of adaptive running, in chapter 2.
Rule #2:
Learn how your individual body adapts to various types of
training, and train accordingly.
In mathematics there is a concept that’s called an asymptote,
which is a line that moves closer and closer to another line but never
meets it. When it’s done right, the long-term training process is like
an asymptote. The line that the training process moves toward but
never reaches is “perfect training.” The fact that training never meets
this line symbolizes the fact that it’s impossible to train perfectly. No
matter how well you train, you can always look back and see
something you could have done better. What’s more, you’re always
changing as a runner—due to aging and fitness development—so
you never advance beyond the need to change your training to adapt
to your changing body.
While it’s impossible to train perfectly, it is possible to train better
and better. By learning and applying the best training practices, you
can start the process pretty far along the line—much closer to
perfect training than if you tried to figure out everything on your own.
But you won’t move any closer to perfect training unless you
continually adapt your training to your individual body. The more you
learn about yourself as a runner, and the more information you
gather from your body’s response to the training (and racing) that
you do, the better you’ll be able to tweak your future training to apply
the right training stimulus at the right time.
--- PAGE 30 ---
You can start this custom adaptation process before you even
begin your next training cycle by creating a customized training
program that adapts the tried-and-true training methods to fit your
specific needs. Then, once you’ve started the training program, you
can adapt it further each day based on how your body responds to
the training you’ve done. Once you complete the training program,
you can take everything you’ve learned about yourself as a runner
over the past weeks and apply it in creating the next training
program, which will be even better customized than the one just
completed. And on it goes.
Adjusting, refining, and customizing your training—in short,
practicing the second rule of running—requires that you pay close
attention to the results of your training and racing. Paying close
attention is the only way to know when an adjustment is needed, and
what sort of adjustment might be best. It’s the only way to gather the
knowledge about yourself as a runner that you need to refine and
evolve your training so that your personal training recipe becomes
ever more customized to your unique combination of strengths,
weaknesses, needs, and goals.
The concept of paying close attention is simple enough, but most
competitive runners are not accustomed to closely analyzing the
results of their training. They prefer to do as much work as possible
with their legs and as little as possible with their heads. I can
understand that; it’s easier just to go on automatic pilot. But your
legwork will be much more effective if you make a consistent effort to
use your head to practice the second rule of running and thereby
make your training truly adaptive on every level.
The Four Principles of Adaptive Running
There are four ways in which your training must be adaptive.
Hence there are four key principles of adaptive running. First of all,
everything about your training has to be oriented toward the goal of
--- PAGE 31 ---
stimulating the precise set of physiological adaptations that you will
need to achieve your next peak-race goal. Second, the plan you
create to achieve this goal must adapt tried-and-true training
methods to fit your unique running makeup. Third, this plan must
adapt each day based on how your body responds to planned
training. And finally, your next training cycle must be adapted based
on what you learn about yourself as a runner and your progress
made in the present training cycle. Let’s take a closer look at the
practical applications of each of these four principles.
Adaptive Running Principle #1:
The goal of training is to stimulate the precise set of
physiological adaptations that are needed to achieve maximum
performance in a peak race.
Each runner has what I call a performance threshold at any given
race distance—that is, a maximal average pace that he or she can
sustain from the starting line to the finish line. Your objective in each
cycle of training is to elevate the threshold associated with the
distance of your chosen peak race. For example, if your best
average marathon pace is 7:00/mile, your next training objective
might be to improve your marathon threshold pace to 6:51/mile (sub-
three-hour pace). To achieve this objective, you must first achieve
certain specific physiological adaptations that will enable you to run
faster than you have in the past.
Your training program will be most effective if you understand the
nature of the adaptations you need to achieve this goal and how to
train in a way that takes you from your current fitness state to the
race-ready state. In other words, you need to know the physiological
ingredients of better performance at your peak-race distance and the
cause-effect relationships between various types of training and
these ingredients. This sort of knowledge doesn’t require a Ph.D. in
exercise physiology. In the adaptive running system, there are only
--- PAGE 32 ---
three components of running fitness: aerobic fitness, neuromuscular
fitness, and specific endurance. And there are only three types of
training: aerobic-support training, muscle training, and specific-
endurance training. I think you can guess which type of training is
used to stimulate improvement in each component of fitness.
Every race goal demands a certain level and blend of aerobic
fitness, neuromuscular fitness, and specific endurance. The
marathon requires a different blend of these three components than
the mile does. The goal of running a three-hour marathon requires a
slightly different blend than the goal of running a four-hour marathon.
And the blend of aerobic fitness, neuromuscular fitness, and specific
endurance that you would need to run a three-hour marathon might
even be a bit different from the blend that another runner would need
to achieve the same goal, based on differences in your strengths
and weaknesses.
Conceptually, training to achieve your race goal is as simple as
performing the right mix of aerobic training, muscle training, and
specific-endurance training to develop your running fitness from its
current state to the state that will enable you to sustain your target
pace over the full race distance. By the time you finish reading this
book, you will know how to do this with confidence.
--- PAGE 33 ---
For the competitive runner, the objective of training is to adapt
the body to the specific demands of racing. © Alison Wade
Adaptive Running Principle #2:
Training programs must be adapted to the individual strengths,
weaknesses, needs, and goals of each runner.
As I mentioned before, there are a number of training methods
that seem to work well for all runners. Every runner should learn
these methods and incorporate them into his or her training. These
methods include long runs, threshold runs, and recovery (or “easy”)
runs. But the best ways to apply these universal principles and
methods are different for each runner. In order to train optimally, you
must not only understand the universals; you also must know
--- PAGE 34 ---
yourself as a runner. Only then can you create a fully customized
training plan that will work best for you.
When you sit down to design a training plan for yourself, begin by
considering your recent training, your age and overall running
experience, your goals, your injury history, your strengths and
weaknesses, and other such factors that are relevant to your
training. Assessing yourself in terms of these factors will allow you to
create a plan that is well customized to the runner that only you are.
The most important consideration is your goal. Appropriate goal-
setting itself must be based on a clear-eyed assessment of your
ability as a runner. I have found that most competitive runners are
able to set appropriate goals if given a few simple tools to work with.
When you establish a goal, you establish the set of physiological
adaptations that will be needed to achieve your goal, and this, in
turn, will tell you the types of peak-level training you will need to be
capable of doing in the final weeks before your peak race.
The specific training path you select to get from point A (your
current fitness level) to point B (your goal) will then depend on how
you assess other factors, such as the running mileage that is most
appropriate for you given your past training and your next goal.
Other important considerations include your current place in the
long-term process of development as a runner (your “running age”)
and whether your injury history suggests that certain measures
should be taken to avoid further injuries in the future.
This assessment can be used to create a training program that’s a
little different from the program that any other runner might create in
pursuit of the same goal. It will share many of the basic elements
with other running programs, but the details will be distinct, because
they will have been chosen in response to your individual
assessment. In chapter 6, I will show you how to conduct your own
complete running self-assessment.
--- PAGE 35 ---
Adaptive Running Principle #3:
Individualized training schedules must be adapted daily, based
on the runner’s response to recent training and any other
factors that may affect the runner’s readiness for planned
training.
As I’ve mentioned, it’s impossible to predict exactly how your body
will respond to the training you have planned—even if you have
done a good job of customizing your training to your strengths,
weaknesses, needs, and goals. In addition, factors outside of
training may also affect your body in ways that have implications for
your planned training. For these reasons, a certain amount of
responsive adaptation is required to stay on track toward your
objective throughout the training process.
Training for a peak race is kind of like undertaking a long sailing
trip. The shortest distance to your destination is a straight line, but
the fastest way to get there will involve many zigzags. You will
encounter unpredictable winds and currents on your journey. In
responding to these factors, you may find yourself heading a little to
the left or right of your final destination some days, but your overall
progress in the right general direction will be much greater than it
would be if you stubbornly insisted on heading straight toward your
destination regardless of winds and currents.
Those unexpected winds and currents are like the small surprises
you experience in your body’s response to training as the process
unfolds. Some days you feel better than expected, other days worse,
and certain facets of your running fitness are sure to improve faster
or slower than you thought they would. If you respond appropriately
to these surprises, you will probably achieve your goal despite
making many on-the-fly adjustments. If you insist on executing every
workout exactly as you planned it many weeks ago, you probably
won’t achieve your goal.
--- PAGE 36 ---
The objective is to always try to do the most beneficial workout
possible each day from the beginning of the program to the end.
There are two strategies that I recommend to achieve this objective.
The first is planning in pencil. By this I mean that all of the workouts
you include in your training plans should be considered tentatively
scheduled. These planned-in-pencil workouts represent what you
anticipate being the most appropriate workouts to perform each day
when you sit down to draw up a map leading to your next peak-race
goal. But they are created with the understanding that you will have
a much better sense of which workout is most appropriate on any
given day as that day draws near. And you might not be certain
about which workout is most appropriate until hours before you start
warming up, or even after you’ve begun a workout.
Planning in pencil is different from not planning at all, of course. It
is very helpful to have a concrete understanding of the training steps
you will realistically have to take to develop your fitness from its
current state to a race-ready state. However, it is equally important to
understand the limitations of a training plan. The main limitation of
training plans is that they try to predict the future based on limited
data. Planning in pencil means waiting to make a final decision about
the format of your next workout until you have all the data you need
to make the best possible decision.
The second adaptive running strategy to ensure that you always
do the most beneficial workout on any given day is responsive
adjustment. Once you have gone to the trouble of creating a training
plan, you should follow it. In other words, you should do the workout
that is scheduled each day unless you have a specific reason to do a
different workout or take a day off. Not only your decision to change
your planned workout, but also your choice of a specific alternative
to the planned workout, must be based on a clear assessment of
your present needs. Responsive adjustment is a method of altering
planned training on the basis of information provided by your own
body. In practice it can range from replacing a planned hard workout
with an easy run based on lingering fatigue, to adding more muscle
--- PAGE 37 ---
training to your schedule based on an assessment that your
neuromuscular fitness is not where it should be.
Adaptive Running Principle #4:
The runner must adapt his or her training from season to
season, year to year, in response to the effects of the most
recently completed training cycle, to stimulate further positive
adaptations.
A training stimulus is a workout or sequence of workouts that
provokes an adaptive response. A training stimulus only remains a
stimulus as long as your body is still adapting to it. Once your body
has fully adapted to a training stimulus, continuing to train the same
way will not produce any additional fitness gains. In order to continue
gaining fitness, you need to modify your training such that it will once
again stimulate an adaptive response.
For this reason, you must not train exactly the same way in
consecutive training cycles. No matter how much success you had in
your last training program, you need to change it in sensible ways to
keep improving. Put another way, you need to take advantage of the
success you had in your last training cycle by creating a new training
plan that demands even more from your body. I will provide
comprehensive guidelines on how to adapt your training from one
training cycle to the next in chapter 11.
--- PAGE 38 ---
Dathan Ritzenhein © Bill Hook
Runner Profile: Dathan Ritzenhein
Dathan Ritzenhein is one of the most gifted American-born
runners in history. He won back-to-back Foot Locker Cross Country
National Championships in high school, claimed a World Junior
Cross Country Championships bronze medal in 2001, and won the
NCAA Cross Country Championships in 2004. At only 25 years of
age, he has a long and bright competitive future ahead of him.
I became Dathan’s coach shortly after he decided to forego his
remaining NCAA eligibility and turn professional following his
sophomore year at the University of Colorado. There were two main
priorities I started to address when I began working with him. The
first was his susceptibility to injuries. He had already suffered two
--- PAGE 39 ---
stress fractures and a few other breakdowns in his short running
career. Most injury-prone runners have poor muscle strength in one
or more important areas, and I found this to be the case with Dathan.
He had trained hard in his youth, but the biggest thing he had
neglected in his training was strength. To address the problem, I had
him do a lot of short, steep hill sprints. His strength improved quickly,
and he’s been free of major injuries for a long time now.
My second priority as Dathan’s coach has been to develop his
aerobic system. Aerobic development should always be an important
priority for young distance runners, because it takes years of
consistent training to develop the aerobic system to near-peak levels
and nothing else contributes more to success in distance running
than a strong aerobic system. Yet Dathan has already done a lot of
running for one so young, and he has a solid aerobic foundation, so
not just any workout is going to give him a stimulus for further
aerobic development. The most beneficial workouts for him at this
stage are challenging long runs and aggressive tempo runs. I give
him as much lactate threshold training as he can handle. High-
intensity intervals are administered in small doses. There will be
plenty of time for more of that stuff later. The rest is filler, but it’s a
kind of filler that matters. High total running volume is itself a good
aerobic stimulus for Dathan, as it is for any runner whose aerobic
system still has potential for further development.
Dathan has responded well to this training recipe. His first race
after I started working with him was a competitive international cross-
country race in Ireland, which he won, beating several top African
runners. More recently, he recorded personal best times at 5,000
meters and 10,000 meters on the track.
After working with Dathan for only a short period of time, I became
convinced that he was really built to run fast for a couple of hours—
in other words, for marathon running. One of the most important
tasks in my coaching role is figuring out what type of runner each of
my athletes is and using this assessment to channel him or her in
--- PAGE 40 ---
the right career direction. In this case, I saw that Dathan was small
and light, had predominately slow-twitch muscle fibers, and was very
fatigue-resistant: a born marathon runner. I discussed these
observations with him and we decided that there was no reason to
wait to move him up to the marathon distance. Dathan’s first
marathon was a bit of a disappointment, but his second was a major
breakthrough: On November 3, 2007, he took second place at the
U.S. Olympic Team Trials–Men’s Marathon and qualified to run in the
2008 Olympic Marathon in Beijing, China.
--- PAGE 41 ---
Adaptive Running Methods 2
         
Adaptive running is not about reinventing the wheel of training for
each athlete. There are certain training methods that I believe to be
effective for every runner. Creating a customized training plan for
yourself is simply a matter of learning these methods and applying
them in the way that suits you best.
Even though I train each of my runners uniquely on the level of
details, on a group level there are some general characteristics that
each runner’s training shares with that of the others. These general
characteristics represent the training methods that I have found to be
beneficial for every runner, and therefore to be essential
characteristics of any successful training program. There are 12
general methods that characterize my adaptive running system:
1. consistent, moderately high running volume
2. nonlinear periodization
--- PAGE 42 ---
3. progression from general training to specific training
4. three-period training cycles
5. lots of hill running
6. extreme intensity and workload modulation
7. multi-pace workouts
8. nonweekly workout cycles
9. multiple threshold paces
10. constant variation
11. one rest day per week
12. selective cross-training
Let’s take a closer look at each of these methods. This chapter is
meant to serve as a general introduction to the methods you will use
when practicing adaptive running. You will learn all of the details you
need to know to apply these methods in subsequent chapters
dealing with the specifics of designing workouts and training plans.
1. Consistent, Moderately High Running Volume
General running volume—or how much you run—is the most basic
parameter of training and therefore the first parameter that each
runner should consider in creating a customized training plan. How
many times per week should I run? How many miles per week? How
much should my running volume increase from the beginning to the
end of my training plan? These are the questions you need to
--- PAGE 43 ---
answer before asking any others as you look ahead to your next
training cycle.
The running volume that is most appropriate for you depends on
your next peak-race goal, your capacity to absorb and recover from
frequent runs and longer runs, and your training history. As a general
rule, I recommend that runners consistently maintain a moderately
high running volume relative to these individual considerations.
Some training systems are characterized by extremely high
volume rather than moderately high volume. In extreme high-volume
systems, runners push themselves to run as many miles each week
as they possibly can. Arthur Lydiard was a persuasive proponent of
extreme high-volume training. Many of America’s top runners of the
1970s and early 1980s—including Frank Shorter, Bill Rodgers, and
Alberto Salazar—were strongly influenced by Lydiard’s philosophy
and achieved great success on high-mileage training (upwards of
150 miles per week in some cases).
Other training systems are known as high-intensity systems. In
these systems, training intensity, not training volume, is considered
to be the true path to running success. The weekly training schedule
is packed with high-speed sessions that leave runners exhausted
after relatively few miles compared to the number of miles they could
complete at lower intensities. High-intensity training systems are
necessarily moderate-volume systems, because the more high-
speed running you do each week, the less total running you can do
without becoming overtrained or injured. Many great runners have
achieved outstanding success on training programs that emphasized
quality over quantity. American middle-distance star Alan Webb and
former marathon world record holder Steve Jones of Wales are
among the most noteworthy runners to have reached the top by
doing a lot of high-intensity workouts and less total mileage than
most of their peers. Bill Bowerman, the legendary University of
Oregon coach and Nike cofounder, also used a high-intensity,
moderate-volume system with his athletes.
--- PAGE 44 ---
Based on the proven effectiveness of both approaches, I like to
split the difference between the extremes in volume emphasis and
intensity emphasis. I believe that high running volume is
indispensable for maximal aerobic development. However, high-
intensity training clearly provides fitness benefits that moderate-
volume training does not. Since the only way to truly maximize
running mileage is to forego high-intensity training, I believe that
overemphasizing mileage is a mistake. Most runners will get the best
results by finding a balance between quality (intensity) and quantity
(volume). So the adaptive running approach is to do as much
running at various faster speeds as you can do without seriously
limiting the total running volume you can absorb, and to do as much
total running as you can do without seriously limiting the amount of
high-intensity running you can absorb. Naturally, the precise formula
is different for each runner, and finding it requires experimentation.
Another aspect of my philosophy on running volume is
consistency. Some training systems entail large fluctuations in
running volume throughout the training cycle. I prefer to keep the
overall running volume fairly consistent throughout the training cycle
while manipulating other variables to produce fitness gains.
Obviously, when an athlete’s recent training has been at a low
volume it is necessary to gradually increase it to the level that is
required for peak fitness. However, once a runner has attained this
level, I like to have him or her stay relatively close to that level
thereafter, except for brief off-season rest periods.
The rationale for consistency in running volume is, first of all, that it
does no harm to maintain a relatively high volume year-round. As
long as you take one or two breaks each year and reduce the overall
workload of your training when appropriate, you won’t wear yourself
down. Secondly, having to build your running fitness from a low level
to the level required for peak fitness can really bog down a training
program, because volume increases must be executed gradually to
avoid overtraining and injuries, and it’s very risky to increase overall
running mileage and high-intensity running mileage simultaneously.
--- PAGE 45 ---
You’ll be able to build fitness faster and peak at a higher
performance level if you start each training cycle with a relatively
high volume of running. And the only way to safely start a training
cycle at a fairly high volume is never to allow your training volume to
drop too low.
A third benefit of maintaining moderately high running mileage
more or less year-round is that it reduces injury risk. Injuries tend to
occur during periods of increasing running volume. If you keep your
mileage relatively high, you will minimize these risky volume ramp-up
periods in your training.
2. Nonlinear Periodization
Every running coach uses a variety of types of training with
athletes. Each specific type of training is intended to develop a
specific aspect of running fitness. In my adaptive running system,
aerobic-support training develops the aerobic system, muscle
training cultivates the neuromuscular aspect of running fitness (i.e.,
speed, strength, and power), and specific-endurance training is used
to layer a race-specific fitness peak atop the foundation of aerobic
and neuromuscular fitness. Most other training systems involve a
similar mix of training types, although there are significant
discrepancies in the details.
The term “periodization” refers to how one’s training evolves from
the beginning to the end of a training cycle. Periodization is
considered linear when each period or phase of training is very
different from the other periods in terms of the degree to which each
training type is emphasized or deemphasized. Periodization is
considered nonlinear when all of the training types are mixed
together throughout the training cycle and changes in emphasis are
less extreme. My approach to periodization is nonlinear.
--- PAGE 46 ---
Traditionally, linear periodization has been the more popular
approach. And even today, a lot of coaches divide the training cycle
into distinct phases and put a strong emphasis on just one type of
training in each phase. By contrast, my training plans feature a more
even balance of training types throughout the training cycle. My
runners always work on every aspect of running fitness. The
distribution of emphasis does change, but I do not reduce any
training type to mere “lip-service” level, or phase it out entirely, as
others do. The only exception is the final few weeks of training
before a peak race, called the sharpening period, when we really
zero in on race-pace training. I’ll say more about the sharpening
period later in the chapter.
I believe it’s extremely important never to allow any single aspect
of your running fitness to fall too far behind the others in your
training, because they are all so deeply interdependent. The
inevitable consequence of allowing, say, your neuromuscular fitness
to stagnate while you work hard on your aerobic fitness and specific
endurance is that lack of neuromuscular fitness will become a limiter
to further development of the other two aspects of your fitness.
Some runners do not perform a weekly long run at the beginning
of base training, but I like to introduce this type of training
immediately and keep it there throughout the training cycle. Some
runners do sprint training only during one brief phase of the training
cycle, but my runners do sprints once or twice every week (on steep
hills). In conventional training systems, lactate threshold training
(described later in this chapter) is introduced in the middle of the
training cycle. I prescribe threshold work from the very beginning and
increase it steadily until the middle of the training cycle, after which
time I may or may not taper it off, depending on the athlete’s primary
race distance. But it never goes away. The same general pattern
holds for every type of training that’s a part of the adaptive running
system.
--- PAGE 47 ---
In addition to preventing weak links from developing, another
advantage of nonlinear periodization is that it increases the
adaptability of your training. When you keep all aspects of your
running fitness at a fairly high level, you can take your training in any
of a number of different directions fairly quickly based on what you
seem to need. When you’ve recently neglected any specific type of
training, it’s always necessary to ease into doing more of it—
otherwise you risk becoming overtrained or injured. So if you
suddenly find that a lack of muscle training has left you with a deficit
of neuromuscular fitness (you’ll find out how to make such
assessments in chapter 8), your only sensible course of action to
correct this problem is to start doing small amounts of muscle
training and gradually build neuromuscular fitness from its current
low level. But if challenging muscle-training efforts have remained a
regular part of your training, you can correct a neuromuscular fitness
deficit much more quickly by aggressively boosting your muscle
training without much risk of becoming overtrained (that is,
chronically fatigued) or getting hurt.
3. Progression from General Training to Specific Training
One of the most important principles of sports performance is the
principle of specificity. It refers to the fact that the body adapts very
specifically to the demands placed upon it in training. Due to the
principle of specificity, there is no such thing as truly all-around
running fitness. The running fitness of every runner is always limited,
reflecting the specific nature of the training he or she has done. For
example, you might run 100 miles a week on the plains of Nebraska
and consider yourself one heck of a fit runner, but when you
compete in the Mt. Washington Road Race you get your butt kicked
because your body is not specifically adapted to running up hills. Or
you might be able to run a full marathon at a pace of eight minutes
per mile, because you always train at this pace, but for the same
reason, when you try to sustain seven-minute miles in a 10K race
you come up short.
--- PAGE 48 ---
The most important ramification of the principle of specificity for
competitive runners is that race-specific fitness requires race-pace
training. Every competitive runner likes to achieve time goals in
races. When you show up to a race with a particular time goal in
mind, whether or not you achieve that goal depends on whether your
body is able to sustain the average pace that is associated with your
time goal over the entire race distance. The principle of specificity
tells us that your body is most likely to have this ability if you have
recently done some hard workouts that have challenged your ability
to sustain your goal race pace. Doing highly race-specific workouts
in your peak weeks of training will ensure that your body is
specifically adapted to your particular race time goal.
The principle of specificity only goes so far, however. If you took
this principle to the extreme, you would perform challenging race-
specific workouts throughout the training cycle. The problem with this
approach is that the body can only progressively adapt to this type of
training for a few weeks before it reaches a temporary adaptive limit,
or peak. Therefore it’s crucial to have a very high level of non-race-
specific running fitness before you start to do race-specific workouts.
By taking the time to build your fitness to a high level with an
emphasis on the types of training that serve as a foundation for race
fitness, you can perform your race-specific workouts at a higher level
and therefore race at a higher level. But if you start trying to do race-
specific workouts in the first week of a training cycle, when your base
fitness level is relatively low, you will not be able to perform these
workouts at a high level, and when you reach your adaptive limit four
to six weeks later, you will not have made much progress from your
starting point.
The term I use for the type of fitness that is required for successful
racing is specific endurance, which represents the ability to resist
fatigue at race pace. As mentioned above, there are two other types
of running fitness that serve as elements of the foundation for race
fitness: neuromuscular fitness and aerobic fitness. Neuromuscular
fitness is basically the ability of your brain’s motor centers to
--- PAGE 49 ---
efficiently activate large numbers of muscle fibers during running,
which is required to achieve high speeds and to sustain high speeds
in an energy-efficient manner. Aerobic fitness refers to the ability of
the runner’s body to use oxygen at a high rate during running. In
crude terms, neuromuscular fitness is the capacity to run very fast
for a short duration and aerobic fitness is the capacity to run slow or
moderately fast for a long duration. Together, these capacities
represent the two “extremes” of running fitness.
Specific endurance, or race fitness, represents a blend of
neuromuscular and aerobic fitness. Generally speaking, the higher
you can elevate your neuromuscular or aerobic fitness, the higher
you can raise your specific endurance. Therefore, my adaptive
running approach to the overall training cycle is to first build a
foundation by focusing on the extremes of running fitness. Gradually,
I bring these extremes together by adding a little more of an aerobic
element to neuromuscular training and a little more of a
neuromuscular element to aerobic training. Finally, in the last few
weeks of training, I focus on true specific-endurance workouts
performed at or very near the runner’s goal race pace. In keeping
with my nonlinear approach to periodization, specific-endurance
training is always part of the mix, but it stays in the background until
the sharpening period.
Traditionally, the term “sharpening period” (or “sharpening phase”)
has been used to denote a brief period at the end of a training cycle
when distance runners add short, high-speed intervals to their
training to “sharpen” for a race. In the adaptive running system, the
sharpening period denotes a short period at the end of the training
cycle when runners emphasize challenging race-pace workouts. To
avoid confusion, I sometimes tell people that I don’t “sharpen” my
runners for racing at all, but that’s not quite accurate.
4. Three-Period Training Cycles
--- PAGE 50 ---
As alluded to above, in adaptive running, the training cycle is
divided into three periods, or phases. The training cycle starts with
an introductory period, which lasts just a few weeks; it then moves
into a longer fundamental period; and it culminates in a sharpening
period.
The purpose of the introductory period is to establish an
appropriate fitness foundation that will prepare you for the more
challenging and focused training of the fundamental and sharpening
periods. Priority number one is to gradually but steadily increase
your running mileage toward the level you have targeted as your
average weekly running mileage for the training cycle. This will
enhance your body’s ability to absorb the training of the fundamental
and sharpening periods without injury or overtraining fatigue. Other
priorities of the introductory period include establishing a foundation
of neuromuscular fitness with very small doses of maximal-intensity
running and beginning the long process of developing efficiency and
fatigue-resistance at race pace with small doses of running in the
race-pace range.
In the fundamental period, your training becomes increasingly
specific. Your longest runs become more race-specific by first
approaching race duration (if you’re training for a long race) and then
by becoming faster. Your fastest runs become more race-specific by
generally moving toward race pace and by challenging you to
sustain fast speeds for longer and longer durations.
The purpose of the sharpening period is to raise your running
fitness to its peak level, or, put another way, to make your running
fitness as race-specific as possible. Peaking is a mysterious art. For
whatever reasons, it’s just not easy to achieve one’s highest possible
level of performance on the day of a major goal race, despite all the
care that goes into planning one’s training to produce this result.
American runners at the top levels tend to run well early in the
competitive season and fall flat toward the end of the season, when
--- PAGE 51 ---
they should hit their peak. The reason, I believe, is that they start to
do race-specific “sharpening” training too early in the training cycle.
A runner’s body can only progressively adapt to race-specific training
for a few weeks until a limit—that is, a peak—is reached. Trying to
prolong race-specific training beyond a few weeks is almost certain
to result in a premature peak or failure to peak at all. For this reason,
I begin the sharpening period of training just four to six weeks before
the athlete’s peak race occurs.
Merely limiting the duration of your sharpening period of training
will not guarantee a successful peak, however. There are a few other
tricks you can use to reliably increase the odds of peaking
successfully. It’s all about understanding the factors that tend to
trigger a peak and those that tend to delay a peak, and applying
each factor as appropriate.
One factor that tends to delay a performance peak is maintaining
balance in one’s training. A peak tends to occur when you push your
fitness strongly in a single direction by heavily emphasizing a
particular type of training. I take great pains to develop a high level of
well-rounded fitness in my runners through balanced training before
pushing their fitness in the direction of race-specificity in the final
month of training.
Race-pace training is certainly included in the overall training mix
before the final four weeks, but the amount is limited compared to
other training paces. Then, in the sharpening phase, I have my
runners really home in on the race-pace range to effect a quick,
quantum leap in race-specific fitness. Now is no longer the time to be
a well-rounded runner. You want to be as good as you can be at only
one thing: running at your goal race pace over the full race distance.
--- PAGE 52 ---
In the adaptive running system, you will maintain a consistently
high level of well-rounded fitness. © Alison Wade
If you can achieve a handful of workout performances in the
sharpening period of training that are almost equivalent to your goal
race performance, your attainment of that goal will be all but
guaranteed (as long as you rest up adequately before the race). To
achieve such workout performances, you must first of all be very
close to race fitness, thanks to the training you’ve done up to this
point; second, you must be sufficiently recovered from recent training
to perform near your best; and finally, the format of the workout must
be very similar to the race itself. For example, if you’re peaking for a
10K, your toughest sharpening workout might consist of 6 × 1 mile at
10K race pace with very short, 60-second active recoveries.
--- PAGE 53 ---
5. Lots of Hill Running
People who know only a little about my training system seem to
know me as the coach who has his runners do a lot of hill sprints.
Short hill sprints are an integral feature of my training system, and
one that I use with every runner. However, this method is no more
important than any of the 11 other adaptive running methods
discussed in this chapter. Nor am I the only coach who uses steep
hill sprints. In fact, I myself borrowed the specific approach to hill
sprints that I now use from the Italian coach Renato Canova, who in
turn learned about them from an American sprint coach named Bud
James.
Like the other core training methods in my system, hill work is
used throughout the training cycle. The amount and type of hill
training varies, however. We start with very short sprints—
approximately eight seconds apiece—at maximal intensity on the
steepest hill we can find. The nature of this challenge is not much
different from that of a set of explosive Olympic weightlifting
exercises in the gym, except it is more running-specific. These short,
maximal-intensity efforts against gravity offer two key benefits. First,
they strengthen all of the running muscles, making the runner much
less injury-prone. They also increase the power and efficiency of the
stride, enabling the runner to cover more ground with each stride
with less energy in race circumstances. These are significant
benefits from a training method that takes very little time and is fun to
do.
As the weeks go by, we gradually increase the number of sprints
performed in each session. The intervals also become slightly longer
(increasing to 10 seconds and finally to 12 seconds), and we may
move to less-steep gradients. This process serves to make the gains
in strength, power, and muscle fiber recruitment more specific to
race-intensity and race-duration running.
--- PAGE 54 ---
Hill running is the only “weightlifting” my runners do. They hoist no
barbells or dumbbells. They do some exercises to develop strength
in their abdominal muscles and lower back, but that’s it. Some other
runners lift weights to build strength and prevent injuries. I believe
that short hill sprints achieve the same effect. A number of the
runners I’ve coached over the years have come to me with long
injury histories, but in every such case I’ve been able to keep them
healthy, and I attribute much of this success to hill work.
For example, for three years I coached a very talented high school
runner who was also very injury-prone. Her parents brought her to
me because every time she tried to take her training workload to the
next level, she developed a stress fracture. When I started working
with her, I had her start doing hill sprints. She quickly became
noticeably stronger and her injury problems vanished. Incidentally,
her best mile time dropped from 5:30 to 4:54 in one year.
In addition to hill sprints, I make frequent use of longer hill
repetitions and uphill progressions. Hill repetitions are essentially
speed work with an added hill component. They put less strain on
the legs than traditional speed work, making them a good alternative
early in the training cycle for all runners as well as for those limited
by their strength. Uphill progressions are prolonged stretches of
uphill running (10 minutes or more) at the end of an otherwise easy
run. They are an effective way to increase the aerobic training
stimulus and the strength-building stimulus of a workout without
taking too much out of a runner.
6. Extreme Intensity and Workload Modulation
Intensity modulation refers to changing the pace level or levels
that are targeted from workout to workout. Extreme intensity
modulation means changing target pace levels more frequently and
to a greater degree throughout the typical week of training than most
runners do. Workload modulation refers to changing the overall
--- PAGE 55 ---
challenge level of a workout from one run to the next. (Bear in mind
that a high-intensity workout is not the same thing as a high-
workload workout. Very fast runs can be relatively easy if they’re also
short, while moderate-pace runs can be quite challenging if they’re
long enough.) Extreme workload modulation means mixing workouts
of widely varying challenge levels throughout the week.
I believe in doing two hard workouts per week, not including the
weekend long run. By “hard workouts” I mean workouts involving a
moderate to large dose of high-intensity running (half-marathon race
pace or faster). It can be a somewhat misleading term, because the
weekly long run can be the most challenging run of all for certain
runners at certain times (especially toward the end of a half-
marathon or marathon training program), but I’ve been using the
term forever and I’m too old to change. I use the term “key workouts”
when referring to the weekly long run and the twice-weekly hard
workouts together.
Some elite runners try to pack in three hard workouts during the
week—that is, three workouts featuring moderate to large volumes of
high-intensity running. You might say that these runners train harder
than my runners, who only do two. I’m not so sure. In fact, my
observation has been that, over time, runners accomplish more hard
training, or at least absorb more hard training, when they do two
hard workouts per week instead of three. This happens because you
work hardest on your best days—that is, on the days when you feel
freshest and most ready. Runners are able to perform at a higher
level in their hard workouts when they do just two a week because
they have more opportunity to recover between them.
In simple terms, what I’m saying is that two really hard workouts
per week are better than three merely hard workouts. I believe that
workouts have the greatest fitness-boosting effect when they take
you to a higher level of performance than you have previously
achieved in the present training cycle. In order to take you to a
higher performance level, the workout must be demanding in
--- PAGE 56 ---
duration and intensity, but it also must occur when your body is fully
up to this challenge. Having more recovery time between hard
workouts enables you to perform better in each hard workout, which
enhances the fitness-boosting potential of each hard workout—
provided you once again give your body a chance to absorb it.
Fatigue masks fitness. When you start a workout carrying fatigue
from previous workouts, you will not perform as well as you should.
Consequently, the workout will have limited effect on your fitness,
even if you do rest adequately afterward. Some competitive runners
fear that giving themselves more opportunity to recover necessarily
means that they do not train as hard. But in fact, more often than not,
giving yourself adequate recovery time enables you to train harder
by setting you up to perform at a higher level in your most important
workouts.
In addition to limiting the number of high-intensity workouts to two
per week, adaptive running also brings back the lost art of the
moderate run. For many years, the motto “go hard or go home” has
been an accurate representation of how most coaches approach
training. Either you’re doing a very hard run to stimulate fitness
adaptations or you’re doing a very easy recovery run to help absorb
the previous hard run and prepare for the next. But a weekly
schedule that entails only two hard runs makes it possible to also do
one or two moderate runs (in addition to easy recovery runs) without
hampering your recovery from a previous hard run or sabotaging
your performance in the next.
I think it’s worth taking advantage of this opportunity to do
moderate runs for the simple reason that a moderate run provides a
stronger training stimulus than an easy run. So if your body can
effectively absorb one or two moderate runs per week in addition to
two very hard runs, it just makes sense to do those moderate runs
instead of the easy runs you would do according to the “go hard or
go home” philosophy.
--- PAGE 57 ---
Naturally, the terms “hard,” “moderate,” and “easy” are relative. To
give you a sense of what I mean by a moderate workout, let me
supply one example. Suppose an appropriate hard workout for you
at a given stage of training consists of 5 × 1K at your current 5K race
pace with three-minute active recoveries, sandwiched between a
two-mile warm-up and a one-mile cool-down. A typical easy recovery
workout is 30 minutes of easy jogging. A moderate workout, then,
might be a 15K progression run in which you run the first 10K at an
easy pace and the last 5K at roughly marathon pace.
Elite miler Treniere Clement shows it’s okay to run slow
sometimes, even if you’re very fast. © Alison Wade
If the hard workouts tend to be especially hard in the adaptive
running system, the easy workouts are often equally extreme at the
--- PAGE 58 ---
other end of the workload spectrum. The single most common
training error I see in competitive runners is running too hard on
supposed easy days. There’s no shame in running slow. Running
slow allows you to run longer, and it also enables you to run harder
when you want to run hard. A longer, slower recovery run is better
than a shorter, faster one, because a longer recovery run adds more
volume to your training, and again, volume is the number-one
determinant of running fitness.
I’ve also found that very slow recovery runs are less likely to leave
runners feeling flat in their next hard workout, even when they are
longer than the all-too-typical moderate-pace “recovery” run. Many
runners fail to recover adequately from their hard workouts because
they run too hard on their easy days. As a result, their performance
suffers in their next hard workout. A vicious circle is formed.
Wearing a heart-rate monitor on your easy runs is a good way to
keep yourself honest. By wearing a heart-rate monitor regularly in
your training, you will gain accurate knowledge of the heart-rate
range that is associated with a moderately easy effort. When you set
out on an easy run, control your pace to keep your heart rate within
that range. Your restraint will pay off the next time you’re supposed
to run hard.
Table 2.1 Adaptive Running Pace Levels
In running, exercise intensity is understood in terms of pace. The following
table lists all of the pace targets used in adaptive running workouts and also
identifies the type of training stimulus each of them provides, the type of
workouts each is used in, and an example of such a workout. You will learn
much more about how these target pace levels are used in adaptive running
workouts in subsequent chapters.
--- PAGE 59 ---
Running Pace/
Intensity
Training Type Workouts
Used In
Example Workout
Easy (a pace that
feels subjectively
comfortable)
Aerobic Easy
(“recovery”)
runs, some long
runs,
progression
runs
Easy Run
5 miles easy
Moderate (a pace
that feels comfortable
with a mild aerobic
strain)
Aerobic Moderate runs,
some
progression
runs
Progression Run
4 miles easy + 2
miles moderate
Hard (a pace that
feels hard but
manageable relative
to distance)
Aerobic/Specific
Endurance
Some
progression
runs
Progression Run
4 miles easy + 2
miles hard
Marathon Pace (your
per-mile marathon
pace in peak
condition)
Aerobic/Specific
Endurance
Threshold runs,
marathon-pace
runs
Marathon-Pace
Run
2 miles easy
10 miles @
marathon pace
2 miles easy
Half-Marathon Pace
(either your current or
goal half-marathon
pace, depending on
workout)
Aerobic/Specific
Endurance
Threshold runs Threshold Run
2 miles easy
2 × 15 min. @ half-
marathon pace
w/1-min. active
recovery
2 miles easy
--- PAGE 60 ---
10K Pace (either your
current or goal 10K
pace, depending on
workout)
Aerobic/Specific
Endurance
Threshold runs,
specific-
endurance
intervals, ladder
intervals, hill
intervals, fartlek
runs
Specific-
Endurance
Intervals
2 miles easy
5 × 1 mile @ 10K
pace w/ 400m
active recoveries
2 miles easy
5K Pace (either your
current or goal 5K
pace, depending on
workout)
Specific
Endurance
Specific-
endurance
intervals, ladder
intervals, hill
intervals, fartlek
runs
Hill Intervals
2 miles easy
6 × 2 min. uphill @
5K effort w/ jog-
back recoveries
2 miles easy
3K Pace (your known
or estimated race
pace for 3,000 meters
or 2 miles
Muscle Training Speed intervals,
ladder intervals,
hill intervals,
fartlek runs
Fartlek Run
8 miles easy w/ 10
× 20 sec. @ 5K-3K
pace
1,500m Pace (your
known or estimated
race pace for 1,500
meters or 1 mile)
Muscle Training Speed intervals,
ladder intervals,
fartlek runs,
strides
Ladder Intervals
2 miles easy
1 min., 2 min., 3
min., 2 min., 1
min., 2 min., 3 min.
@ 5K–1,500m
pace w/= duration
active recoveries
2 miles easy
Maximal Effort Muscle Training Steep hill
sprints
Example
5 miles easy + 6 ×
8-sec. hill sprint w/
jog-back
recoveries
--- PAGE 61 ---
7. Multi-Pace Workouts
Multi-pace workouts represent a training method that I use to
achieve greater intensity modulation in the adaptive running system.
Most traditional running workout formats focus on just a single pace,
or intensity level. For example, in a standard long run, the runner
holds a steady, moderate pace long enough to develop a moderate
to high level of fatigue. In a standard speed workout, a runner might
run 12 × 400 meters at 1,500-meter race pace. Yes, there is also
easy running in such workouts, in the form of a warm-up, a cool-
down, and “active recoveries” between the hard 400-meter intervals,
but this easy running only serves to facilitate the 1,500-meter-pace
running, which is the one true target intensity of the workout.
Workouts featuring multiple-intensity targets are certainly not
unheard-of in competitive running, but adaptive running relies on
them far more heavily than most coaches do. Examples include
ladder interval workouts, which may feature intervals of one minute
to six minutes in duration, with the shortest intervals run at 3,000-
meter race pace and the longest intervals run at 10K race pace;
progression runs, in which the first segment is run at an easy
(comfortable) pace and the last segment at either a steady faster
pace or a gradually accelerating pace; and hybrid workouts that
include threshold running at 10K or half-marathon pace and hill
repetitions. What’s great about such workouts is that they enable you
to include more intensity variation in each week of training than you
can when you force yourself to focus on a single target intensity in
most workouts.
There are times in the training process when your body might
benefit most from a small amount of a particular type of training,
such as “speed” training at 1,500-meter to 3,000-meter pace. With
multi-pace workouts, it’s easy to get a small dose of speed training
--- PAGE 62 ---
or another training intensity level when you need it. But if you’re too
reliant on traditional methods, you’re faced with a choice of either
devoting an entire workout to this type of training, and therefore
getting more than you need, or foregoing it, and therefore not getting
enough.
8. Nonweekly Workout Cycles
Another method I use to facilitate intensity modulation in training—
which goes hand in hand with multi-pace workouts—is not locking
myself into rigid one-week cycles. It’s traditional to do one workout of
any given type per week, excluding easy runs: one threshold run,
one interval workout, one long run, and so forth. But there are times
when, for example, you might benefit most from doing more than one
threshold run per week—perhaps one-and-a-half (i.e., one long
threshold run and one short one) or even two would be ideal—or
less than one threshold run per week—perhaps only half a threshold
workout (i.e., one short threshold run), or one every 10 days.
In the adaptive running system, it’s okay to break any convention
you wish to break in pursuit of getting the right amounts and
proportions of training at various intensity levels. Single-pace
workouts and one-week cycles are used when and only when they
serve this end. When they cannot, never hesitate to use multi-pace
workouts and nonweekly cycles to achieve the right mix.
9. Multiple Threshold Paces
In conventional training systems, “threshold training” refers
specifically to running at a pace corresponding to one’s lactate
threshold (also known as the anaerobic threshold). In my adaptive
running system, threshold training has a different meaning.
Specifically, I deal with multiple thresholds, of which the lactate
threshold is one.
--- PAGE 63 ---
The problem I have with one-dimensional threshold training is that
it lacks specificity to race goals. A runner’s race goal is to sustain a
certain pace over a certain distance. Lactate-threshold pace—or the
running pace at which the blood lactate level begins to spike—falls
between 10K race pace and half-marathon race pace for most
runners. Well, that’s a perfectly useful training pace in some
circumstances, but there’s nothing magical about it. Somewhat
slower and somewhat faster training paces are equally useful in
other circumstances. The specific “threshold” pace that is most
beneficial to a given runner at a given time depends on the race
distance he or she is preparing for, the runner’s goal pace, and how
far along the runner is in the training process. A mistake that is made
in many training systems with respect to threshold training is to
overuse the lactate threshold and underutilize other alternatives.
The approach I prefer is to use at least three distinct threshold
pace levels in training and to carefully sequence them to develop
more and more race-specific fitness. I don’t really care how much
lactate my runners have in their blood at any given running pace. I
care how long my runners can sustain their goal race pace and how
fast a pace they can sustain over their goal race distance. The
purpose of threshold training is to increase the duration a runner can
sustain pace levels approaching race pace and/or to increase the
pace a runner can sustain over distance.
So, what are the three threshold pace levels? The first threshold is
the fastest pace the runner could sustain for 2.5 hours, or a little
slower than marathon pace for my male runners. The second
threshold is the fastest pace the runner could sustain for 90 minutes,
which is a little faster than marathon pace for my male runners. And
the third threshold is the fastest pace the runner could sustain for
one hour, which is half-marathon race pace or a bit faster for my
male runners.
For sub-elite runners, the three thresholds are more likely to be
marathon pace or a little faster, half-marathon pace, and a little
--- PAGE 64 ---
slower than 10K pace. When you practice adaptive running, you can
simply run your threshold workouts at your real or estimated
marathon pace (minus a few seconds per mile), half-marathon pace,
and/or 10K pace (plus a few seconds per mile). There’s no need for
scientific precision. The advantage of the multi-pace approach to
threshold training is not greater precision but greater variability, so
you can do threshold workouts that are a better fit for your needs at
any given time.
10. Constant Variation
Variation is intrinsic to my adaptive training system in the sense
that I include several different types of workout in each week
throughout the training cycle. It is also intrinsic to the progressive
nature of the system. Workouts of the same type become more
challenging from one week to the next to take advantage of
increasing fitness and to stimulate even greater fitness gains. But I
also like to include some variation for variation’s sake in my training
—little wrinkles in workouts that don’t have any particular rationale
beyond forcing the runner’s body and mind to experience the
unfamiliar or unexpected.
For example, on a Tuesday I might have one of my runners
perform a fairly standard 10K-pace threshold run on flat roads. The
next Tuesday I might have the runner cover the same distance at the
same intensity level on a trail with steeply undulating hills. The next
Tuesday I might move the runner back to the road and insert a 100-
meter burst at 1,500-meter race pace at the end of each kilometer.
There are several benefits of such variation. Much of the fitness
improvement we experience through training comes as the result of
improved communication between the brain and the muscles. The
brain learns to activate muscle fibers it was formerly unable to
activate, discovers energy-saving ways of timing the activation of
different muscles in the unfolding of the stride action, learns how to
--- PAGE 65 ---
better relax muscles that don’t need to be active in certain phases of
the stride, and so forth. The primary factor that stimulates these sorts
of learning is variation. Each time you change the way you run, your
brain is forced to change the way it communicates with your
muscles, and in facing this challenge your brain makes discoveries
that allow you to run more efficiently and powerfully thereafter. So
the more variation you can include in each week of running—within
reason—the better. Pace, surfaces, gradients, duration, fatigue
states, and even shoes are among the variables you can manipulate
to stimulate stride refinements.
Variation also reduces injury risk. If you run at the same pace on
the same surface in the same shoes all the time, the tissues of your
lower extremities face a tremendous amount of repetition in the type
of stress they experience. Impact forces will concentrate in the same
spots to the same degree, stride after stride, workout after workout,
causing damage to accumulate. Varying your training spreads the
stress around more, so that no particular spot absorbs more than it
can handle. The principle is similar to that which is used on some
assembly lines, where workers rotate among different specific tasks
to prevent carpal tunnel syndrome.
Other benefits of constant variation are less tangible. The mental
exercise of dreaming up little wrinkles to incorporate into your
workout each day forces your mind to engage with your training on a
deeper level. You’re less likely to mentally coast through your
training on “autopilot”—just putting your body through each
preplanned workout and moving on. The key to making adaptive
running work is paying very close attention to your body’s response
to training, learning about yourself as a runner, and using the
information you gather to steer your training in the most appropriate
direction day by day. Challenging yourself to vary your training for
variation’s sake is a simple means of becoming more mindful of your
running—of developing that internal coach’s perspective that you
need to excel.
--- PAGE 66 ---
11. One Rest Day per Week
Almost all of the runners I coach are at the world-class level. They
are genetic lottery winners, born with the innate potential to run very
fast over great distances and the ability to absorb the staggering
amounts of hard training that are required to fully realize this
potential. Yet none of my athletes is exempt from the need for rest.
No runner has ever been capable of training hard every day of the
week, every week. That’s why I prescribe one day of rest per week
for each of my runners (and more whenever necessary).
Rest is relative. A rest day for my elite runners might not be the
same thing as a rest day for you. For them it’s usually a 45-minute
run at a very easy pace. For you, and for most runners, a rest day is
more likely to be a day without exercise, or at most some core-
strengthening exercises. The point is to set aside a day to subject
your body to much less training stress than you usually do. If you
normally run 12 to 15 miles a day in two workouts, at least one of
which involves some high-intensity efforts, then a single, slow, 45-
minute run certainly qualifies as less taxing than normal and will very
likely allow you to absorb your recent training and perform well in
tomorrow’s training. However, runners who normally run
approximately 45 minutes a day in one session will be required to
run much less, engage in some gentler form of exercise, or skip
exercise altogether to achieve the same benefits of absorbing recent
training and preparing for the next hard workout.
Rest days play a crucial role in effective training. It’s easy for
competitive runners to lose perspective and think they need to run to
the point of at least mild fatigue every day. But this mentality is
based on a misunderstanding of how the body adapts to training
stress. Simply doing a workout does not guarantee that your body
will adapt to that workout. There is a difference between doing a
workout and absorbing the workout. If you follow up a hard workout
too soon with another hard workout, chances are your body will not
have a chance to absorb—that is, change in response to—the first
--- PAGE 67 ---
workout. Rest, or at least relative rest, is required to absorb a hard
workout. Rest days provide this opportunity.
There is such a thing as too much rest, though. I strongly
recommend that competitive runners seeking to improve their race
times run six or seven times a week, even if a couple of those six or
seven runs are very slow and easy. It is difficult to achieve the
volume of running that is required for improvement on fewer than six
runs per week. Furthermore, it’s important to do some type of
vigorous exercise at least six days a week simply to stay lean and
maximize your overall health.
12. Selective Cross-Training
The best way to improve your running is to run. However, other
types of exercise may benefit runners by improving performance,
reducing injury risk, and helping them work through injuries without
losing too much fitness. These days, I’m seeing more and more
runners who seem to cross-train just to cross-train. I believe in a very
selective approach to cross-training. I encourage my runners to do
only as much cross-training as they need, when they need it.
One form of cross-training that all runners should do consistently
is core-strength training. Exercises such as stomach crunches and
side step-ups strengthen muscles that play key roles in stabilizing
the joints during running. The more stable your knees, hips, pelvis,
and spine are when you run, the less chance you have of getting
injured. A little core-strength work goes a long way. I recommend
doing five or six exercises two or three times each week. The most
important muscles to target are those of the upper and lower back,
buttocks, hips, lower abdomen, and thighs.
Alternative forms of cardiovascular exercise, such as bicycling,
can be useful when running is painful or impossible due to an injury.
The best way to approach alternative cardiovascular exercise is to
--- PAGE 68 ---
duplicate the planned running workouts you’re missing as closely as
possible in whichever alternative activity you choose. For example, if
you had planned to do a 10-mile progression run with the last two
miles at a moderate pace, instead do a 75-minute bike ride with the
last 15 minutes at a moderate intensity.
That’s about all I’m going to say about cross-training in this book,
because that’s about all there is to it, in my approach. For more
detailed guidelines on incorporating cross-training into your program,
check out Runner’s World Guide to Cross-Training by my coauthor,
Matt Fitzgerald.
Sarah Schwald © Alison Wade
Runner Profile: Sarah Schwald
--- PAGE 69 ---
Sarah Schwald was one of the few athletes that I actively
recruited. I saw her run in the 1,500 meters at the USA National
Track and Field Championships in 2005. Based on close
observation, I believed she was the most talented female runner at
those championships, yet I also saw a lot of unrealized potential in
her. She had great stride mechanics and a very elastic footstrike. I
felt she would make a terrific 5,000-meter runner with proper
training.
I knew that Sarah’s previous coach, Peter Tegen, had heavily
emphasized very high-intensity work—short intervals at 1,500-meter
race pace and faster—with Sarah. To make her stronger aerobically
in preparation for moving up to the 5,000, I reduced her speed
training and introduced longer intervals, lots of threshold work, and
more mileage. After several months on her new program, Sarah was
recording workout performances that indicated she was capable of
running under 15 minutes for 5,000 meters.
Unfortunately, despite her progress, Sarah left me for another
coach after just one year and never did move up to the 5,000. The
one mistake I made with her, I believe, was reducing her speed
training a little too aggressively. Only toward the end of my time with
her did I realize that she was capable of handling a fair amount of
high-intensity work along with all of the aerobic stuff and, indeed,
would thrive best on this mix.
My first year with any runner is mainly a learning year. I do the
best I can to train the athlete optimally based on close analysis of his
or her strengths and weaknesses, my knowledge of the runner’s past
training, and our goals. But in every case, observing the runner’s
response to that first year of training provides a wealth of new
information that allows me to train him or her much more optimally
the following year. That’s why few things frustrate me more than
getting only one year with a promising runner.
--- PAGE 70 ---
Expect your first year of adaptive running to be largely a learning
year for you, too. Don’t get me wrong: You will make plenty of
progress in your first adaptive running training cycle. But in closely
observing your response to this training you will learn many valuable
lessons about yourself as a runner that will enable you to make
substantially more progress the next time around.
--- PAGE 71 ---
Aerobic-Support Training 3
         
Oxygen is a big part of the sport of running. One of the signature
physiological characteristics of the best distance runners is a large
aerobic capacity, or the ability to consume oxygen at a very high rate
while sustaining fast running speeds. And one of the primary effects
of training as a distance runner is a significant increase in the ability
to consume oxygen when running hard.
Why is aerobic capacity so important to running performance?
Because oxygen plays a direct role in releasing energy in the
muscles. The more oxygen your muscles are able to consume as
you run, the more energy they can pour into moving your body
forward and the faster you can run over any distance exceeding a
few hundred meters.
The muscles are also able to release energy without oxygen, or
anaerobically. And, in fact, anaerobic metabolism releases energy
faster than aerobic metabolism does. Thus anaerobic metabolism is
well suited to provide the large amounts of energy that are needed to
fuel very high-intensity efforts, such as short sprints. However,
anaerobic metabolism is much more wasteful than aerobic
--- PAGE 72 ---
metabolism. The aerobic breakdown of a single glucose molecule
yields 20 times as much energy as the anaerobic breakdown of the
same glucose molecule. In addition, the aerobic system can
metabolize fat, the body’s most abundant energy source, whereas
the anaerobic system cannot. Aerobic metabolism is therefore better
suited to sustained submaximal efforts. Working muscles always
release energy both aerobically and anaerobically, but the lower the
intensity of exercise, the more they rely on aerobic metabolism, and
the higher the intensity of exercise, the more they rely on anaerobic
metabolism.
Aerobic capacity is a function of various physiological
characteristics, including a large, powerful heart; high blood volume;
high muscle capillary density; and high concentrations of muscle
mitochondria (the intracellular sites of aerobic metabolism) and
aerobic enzymes, which help oxygen break down fats and glucose to
release energy. Training increases all of these factors and others
related to aerobic capacity. The net result is that the runner can
sustain faster and faster speeds while still relying mainly on aerobic
metabolism.
Research has shown that the maximum volume of oxygen that a
person can use in a given time—a figure referred to by exercise
physiologists as “maximal oxygen uptake” or by the abbreviation
VO2max—accounts for roughly 70 percent of the variation in race
performances among individual runners. This means that, if you are
able to run a 5K one minute faster than I can, it is likely that your
measured VO2max is higher than mine by an amount that is
sufficient to account for 42 seconds of that minute.
Aerobic Capacity: One Factor in the Performance
Equation
--- PAGE 73 ---
As important as it is, the aerobic system is only one of two major
physiological factors in the running performance equation. The
neuromuscular system is the other major factor. Neuromuscular
fitness, which manifests itself as stride power, stride efficiency, and
fatigue resistance, affects performance as much as aerobic fitness
does. Runners with very well developed neuromuscular fitness are
often able to perform better than runners with a higher aerobic
capacity. Studies have shown that, among trained distance runners,
maximal sprint speed and broad jumping distance—two measures of
neuromuscular fitness—predict long-distance racing performance as
well as VO2max does.
In the 1960s, when the concept of aerobic capacity was developed
and VO2max measurement techniques were refined, exercise
scientists and running coaches got a little too excited about the
whole thing and started treating oxygen consumption as the be-all
and end-all of running performance. This bias led to the creation and
widespread use of training practices that were designed to increase
VO2max as much as possible. The erroneous assumption
underlying such aerobic-based training systems is that maximizing
aerobic capacity automatically maximizes performance.
I don’t believe that runners should train to maximize VO2max or
any other individual physiological variable that is related to
performance. Instead, I believe that runners should train to maximize
running performance itself, which requires that they train to develop
both aerobic and neuromuscular fitness in the proper balance
needed to produce specific endurance for their goal event (or the
ability to sustain their goal race pace over the full race distance).
Therefore the adaptive running approach to aerobic development is
not to maximize aerobic development, possibly at the expense of
neuromuscular fitness factors and/or specific endurance, but to
cultivate just the right level of aerobic support to achieve race goals.
--- PAGE 74 ---
Aerobic Needs at Various Race Distances
If you were to go outside and run as far as you could in two
minutes, about half your energy would come from aerobic
metabolism and half from anaerobic metabolism. This makes the
800-meter run a roughly 50/50 aerobic/anaerobic event for those
capable of completing this race distance in two minutes, as world-
class female half-milers and upper-echelon male high school half-
milers can do. You need a strong aerobic system to excel as a two-
lap specialist, but you also need an equally strong anaerobic system
and great speed. Every race that lasts longer than two minutes is
predominantly aerobic for runners of all ability levels.
The highest rates of oxygen consumption are achieved in races of
3,000 to 5,000 meters, which test the very limits of a runner’s aerobic
capacity. Raw speed is still critical to success at these distances, but
nothing is more important than the ability to suck down air, extract its
oxygen and deliver it into the muscle mitochondria, and use the
energy released there to propel forward motion. The anaerobic
system still provides 20 to 30 percent of muscle energy in a 5K,
however, which makes something called “lactate tolerance” another
important factor in running performance at this distance. “Lactate
tolerance” is a somewhat misleading term that essentially refers to
the ability to resist fatigue caused by sustained anaerobic energy
production, which produces chemical changes in the muscles and a
level of pure pain that tend to limit performance.
When you move up to 10K, endurance factors such as running
economy (or energy efficiency) and resistance to nervous system
fatigue (or stride degradation—a.k.a. “falling apart”) start to become
more important. Aerobic capacity remains crucial, though, because
the more energy you can produce aerobically, the less you have to
produce anaerobically, which helps you steer around those
anaerobic fatigue factors that affect 5K race performance. If 5K race
performance depends on lactate tolerance, then you might say that
10K race performance depends more on lactate avoidance.
--- PAGE 75 ---
What’s more, at the 10K distance, a phenomenon known as the
VO2 slow component comes into play. In maximal running efforts
lasting 15 minutes or less, oxygen consumption skyrockets to a
maximal or near-maximal level and then holds steady. In longer
events, oxygen consumption quickly increases to an adequate
submaximal level and then levels off—except it doesn’t quite level
off. It continues to increase slowly for the remainder of the effort as
the runner fatigues. Thanks to the VO2 slow component, you might
very well find yourself breathing as hard at the end of a 10K as you
do throughout a 5K.
The half-marathon is very similar to the 10K in terms of its aerobic
requirements. Those endurance factors mentioned above are just
slightly more important to performance at the longer distance. The
marathon, finally, is a phenomenon unto itself. Roughly 95 percent of
muscle energy is supplied aerobically at this distance, but the rate of
oxygen consumption is well below maximal. Top competitors
consume oxygen at only 85 percent of their VO2max during a
marathon, while mid-pack runners operate at closer to 75 percent of
maximum. Thus, aerobic capacity is no longer quite the limiter in the
marathon that it is at shorter distances.
Yet a high aerobic capacity remains essential, for three reasons.
First, the faster you can run while producing roughly 75 to 85 percent
of your energy aerobically, the faster you can run a marathon.
Second, aerobic capacity is closely tied to endurance characteristics
such as the capacity to efficiently burn fat—the most abundant
muscle fuel. And third, the VO2slow component remains in effect at
this distance. You will find yourself consuming oxygen at a much
higher rate in the last mile of a marathon than in the first mile, even if
your pace is unchanged.
Other endurance factors that are not related to aerobic capacity
are also crucial to marathon performance. These factors include
--- PAGE 76 ---
running economy, resistance to running-related muscle damage,
heat dissipation, and resistance to nervous-system fatigue.
So, as you can see, the aerobic requirement is different at each
race distance, and it also differs somewhat between runners at any
single race distance. Optimal performance at each distance requires
a special balance of aerobic development and other fitness factors
ranging from stride power to muscle damage resistance.
Aerobic Support
The concept of aerobic support refers to the specific foundation of
aerobic system development that is best for performance at a given
race distance. It’s the level at which your aerobic system must be
able to function to prevent oxygen delivery from limiting your
performance in racing. The most practical way to conceptualize
aerobic support is in terms of a specific running speed or intensity
that you must ensure your body is very well adapted to in order to
keep oxygen delivery from making you unable to attain your peak-
race goal.
The optimal level of aerobic support for a 5K peak race is 10K
pace. What this means is that you should train yourself to run a great
10K (whether or not you actually do run a 10K race) before you
sharpen for a 5K peak race, because doing so is the best way to
ensure that your aerobic system is not a weakness in your 5K peak
race. Thus, your aerobic-support training should culminate in very
challenging workouts emphasizing 10K pace running at the end of
the fundamental training period.
The optimal level of aerobic support for a 10K peak race is half-
marathon pace. The primary objective of your aerobic-support
training, if you’re training for a 10K peak race, is to cultivate a high
level of half-marathon race fitness before you do your final
sharpening workouts. You will achieve this objective by performing
--- PAGE 77 ---
challenging workouts emphasizing half-marathon-pace running in the
late fundamental period, and by training to incrementally prepare
your body for these workouts throughout the whole preceding part of
the training cycle.
The optimal level of aerobic support for a half-marathon peak race
is also half-marathon pace. Half-marathon racing is done at or below
the lactate threshold, or the pace above which anaerobic fatigue
factors limit performance. As I mentioned above, aerobic capacity is
paramount at this intensity level because it enables you to sustain a
faster pace without submitting to anaerobic fatigue. Any pace that’s
slower than lactate threshold pace represents a smaller aerobic
challenge, because there’s no risk that anaerobic fatigue factors will
come into play. That’s why the optimal level of aerobic support for
the half-marathon is half-marathon pace itself.
Doing too much training at race pace before the sharpening period
is a sure recipe to peak too early, though, so runners training for a
half-marathon peak race need to limit their half-marathon-pace
training until the last several weeks of the training cycle. Their
threshold workouts should feature a mix of marathon-pace, half-
marathon-pace, and 10K-pace running until then.
The optimal level of aerobic support for the marathon is also half-
marathon pace. Because the endurance challenge of the marathon
is so severe, your goal marathon pace has to be a virtual cakewalk,
aerobically. Training your aerobic system for optimal performance at
the aerobically more challenging half-marathon distance is the best
way to ensure that it sails through the full marathon, even if your legs
don’t (and they never will!).
Building Support
There are three specific jobs you must accomplish in your training
to develop the level of aerobic support you need to achieve a peak-
--- PAGE 78 ---
race goal. First, you must build and maintain adequate running
volume, as average weekly running volume is the strongest
influencer of aerobic fitness.
Second, you must develop a sufficient level of raw endurance to
comfortably cover the distance of your peak race, if you do not have
this level of endurance already, as is the case for most beginning
runners at all distances and for runners of all experience levels at the
marathon distance. Sunday long runs are the primary vehicle for the
development of raw endurance in adaptive running.
Finally, you must perform workouts that are more and more
challenging to your aerobic system as the training cycle unfolds. This
process should culminate in the late foundation period and the
sharpening period with very hard workouts emphasizing the running
pace associated with the optimal level of aerobic support for your
peak-race distance. Progression runs and threshold runs are the
primary vehicles for the development of optimal aerobic support in
adaptive running.
The Volume Question
The physiological adaptations that increase aerobic capacity are
influenced by both the volume and the intensity of the running you
do. The more time you spend running, the farther those adaptations
will proceed. But minute for minute, higher-intensity running
produces greater aerobic adaptations than lower-intensity running.
So the best recipe for aerobic development is a training regimen that
combines a high but manageable running volume with a fairly large
volume of higher-intensity running.
That said, training volume is more foundational than training
intensity with respect to aerobic development, in the sense that
building up to a high volume of running with primarily moderate-
intensity workouts will enable you to handle a greater amount of
--- PAGE 79 ---
higher-intensity running later. For this reason, within the introductory
period of the training cycle, your highest training priority should be to
increase your total running mileage. By the end of this training period
your running volume should be near the level at which it will remain
(with some fluctuation, of course) through the remainder of the
training cycle. Thus, the introductory period should last long enough
to allow you to gradually build your volume to this level, without
rushing the process. Beginning and less-competitive runners
preparing for longer races (half-marathon and marathon) may except
themselves from this rule. In such cases it’s more or less necessary
to build volume throughout the training cycle.
Before you start a new training cycle, you should have in mind a
target average weekly training volume for the fundamental and
sharpening periods. In the first week of training you should run only
slightly more mileage (10 to 15 percent) than you have averaged in
recent weeks, unless you’re coming off a break, in which case you
should use past experience and awareness of your personal
limitations to determine an appropriate number of miles that you can
safely handle but that will suffice to get your fitness moving in the
right direction. In each subsequent week, increase your running
volume by another 10 percent or so until you have reached (or at
least come within 10 to 15 percent of) your volume target. Now you
can move on to fundamental training.
The introductory period should not exceed six weeks, however. If
you cannot build up to your target average weekly running volume
level within six weeks, then your target is too high. But again, if
you’re a beginner or a less-competitive athlete preparing for a half-
marathon or marathon, it’s okay to continue building volume
throughout the fundamental period.
What should your volume target be? Runners training for longer
races should do more volume than those training for shorter races.
One reason is that half-marathoners and marathoners need to do
longer long runs to build the necessary level of endurance, but the
--- PAGE 80 ---
main reason is that shorter-distance runners need to do more high-
intensity running, so they are not able to put in quite as many total
miles.
Table 3.1 provides guidelines that will help you select an
appropriate mileage level. It presents optimal volumes for five
different categories of runners at four distances. “Beginners” are
runners with less than a year of consistent running under their belts.
“Low-Key Competitive Runners” care about improving their race
times, but are either unable or unwilling to devote a lot of time and
energy to training. “Competitive” runners have at least a couple of
years of hard training in their legs and are determined to improve
further, but not at the cost of having to run more than six or seven
times a week. “Highly Competitive” runners wish they could train like
elite runners, but simply cannot. “Elite” runners know who they are.
Be realistic in deciding which category you belong to. In chapter 6,
which deals with the topic of self-assessment, I will offer additional
guidelines to help you determine an appropriate training volume for
your next training cycle.
Table 3.1 Optimal Running Volume for Five Levels of Runner at Four
Race Distances
Use this table to guide your selection of an appropriate average weekly
running volume target for your next training cycle.
Beginner Low-Key
Competitive
Competitive Highly
Competitive
Elite
5K 20–30 25–35 40–50 50–60 90–
110
--- PAGE 81 ---
10K 25–35 30–40 45–55 60–70 95–
115
Half-
Marathon
35–40 35–45 50–60 70–80 100–
120
Marathon 40–50 50–60 60–70 80–90 110–
130
If you plan to exceed 70 miles a week, you will need to run twice a
day at least once a week (a practice known as “doubling”). Trying to
sustain a regimen in which you average more than 10 miles per run
places too much stress on the body, because there is no opportunity
for truly easy runs, so the training workload cannot be modulated
adequately.
Progression Runs, Threshold Runs, and Long Runs
Alongside overall training volume, there are three specific
categories of workout that are primarily responsible for developing
aerobic support at each of the four popular road-race distances. The
three categories are progression runs, threshold runs, and long runs.
(These workouts may also be combined, as when a 20-minute hard
progression is added to the end of a long run.)
In the typical progression run, a short to intermediate-length
segment of moderately hard (but controlled) running is added at the
end of an otherwise easy run. These workouts generally serve to
add a little extra aerobic challenge to a run without overly fatiguing
the runner. Threshold runs use moderately extended running efforts
at moderately high intensity levels to stimulate aerobic-system
adaptations and other physiological changes that enable runners to
--- PAGE 82 ---
sustain faster and faster running paces for longer and longer
stretches of time. Long runs employ extended efforts at easy to
moderately hard effort levels to build the bodily infrastructure that the
aerobic system needs to work efficiently and extensively. Specifically,
long runs increase muscle glycogen storage, resistance to running-
related muscle damage and pain, and fat-burning efficiency.
Progression Runs
The primary purpose of progression runs is to provide a moderate
stimulus for aerobic development—that is, a stronger stimulus than
the typical easy recovery run but a weaker stimulus than most
threshold runs. Adaptive running makes liberal use of progression
runs because they represent an excellent means of squeezing a little
more beneficial hard work into one’s training without overtaxing the
runner. Many runners rely on the aforementioned “go hard or go
home mentality” in their training. Their workouts are either hard or
easy—there’s nothing in the middle. But I believe that a workout
doesn’t necessarily have to be easy if it’s not hard. If you’re a seven-
days-a-week runner and you do two to three hard workouts per
week, you probably need two to three easy days, too, but that leaves
one or two days that can be moderate—and that’s where
progression runs come in.
Progression runs are most useful in the introductory period of
training, when your fitness level is still low-to-moderate and you’re
not yet ready to tackle threshold workouts. Progression runs
performed during this period will prepare you to benefit from tougher
threshold workouts in the fundamental period. You can start with 10
minutes of moderately hard running at the end of a six-to 10-mile
easy run and go from there. I like to have runners do their early
progressions on an incline, or on hilly terrain, if possible, because
hills build strength and it’s good to build strength during the
introductory period.
--- PAGE 83 ---
In the fundamental and sharpening periods, threshold workouts
take on the primary responsibility of developing aerobic support. But
you can continue to do one or two progression runs throughout the
remainder of the training cycle, because it’s all about squeezing the
greatest possible benefit out of every second you spend running. If
you can finish a seven-mile easy run with 10 minutes of moderately
hard running without negatively affecting your performance in your
designated hard workouts for a given week, why not do it?
Longer-distance runners generally should do more progression
runs than shorter-distance runners should. If you’re training for a 5K
or a 10K, you’ll want to put a heavy emphasis on training intensities
exceeding those that are generally appropriate in progression runs.
Half-marathon and marathon runners can make liberal use of
progression runs, which emphasize running paces in the general
range of race pace.
Progressions are particularly helpful in the context of Sunday long
runs in the fundamental and sharpening periods. Many runners do all
of their long runs at a steady, moderate pace. Their only goal is to go
the distance and build raw endurance. But for competitive runners,
races are not about merely lasting to the finish line; they’re about
sustaining speed to the finish line. Long runs simply are not doing all
that they should do if they only serve to enable you to last to the
finish line. It’s important to incorporate a speed challenge into some
of your long runs, as well. Progression runs are a great way to do
that.
--- PAGE 84 ---
Progression runs offer a simple and manageable way to add a
little extra intensity to your training. © Alison Wade
I have an idiosyncratic way of prescribing intensity for progression
runs. For most hard workouts, I use race-pace targets. For example,
a threshold run might consist of 2 × 15 minutes at half-marathon
pace with a 5-minute active recovery between intervals. But with
progressions, I use subjective intensity guidelines: namely,
“moderate” and “hard.” It’s important that progressions be run by
feel, since their purpose is to stimulate aerobic development without
exhausting the runner. It doesn’t matter what pace you run in your
progressions relative to your various race-pace levels. Just run at
whatever pace feels “moderate” to you in workouts that call for a
moderate progression, and run at whatever pace feels “hard” (yet
manageable) to you in workouts that call for a hard progression.
Table 3.2 presents the six essential progression runs.
--- PAGE 85 ---
Table 3.2 Progression Run Formats
Progression
Run Type
Example Best Use
Moderate
Progression
Run
6 miles easy +
20 min.
“moderate”
Introductory period, to prepare your body for
threshold training and in later periods to
squeeze a little extra hard work into your
schedule
Moderate
Uphill
Progression
Run
6 miles easy +
20 min.
“moderate”
(uphill, if
possible)
Introductory period, to build aerobic support
and strength simultaneously, or any other time
you need both
Hard
Progression
Run
6 miles easy +
20 min. “hard”
Late fundamental period, to help coax aerobic
support toward peak level
Hard Uphill
Progression
Run
6 miles easy +
20 min. “hard”
(uphill, if
possible)
Fundamental period, to build aerobic support
and strength simultaneously after you’ve
already established a foundation with
moderate uphill progression runs
Long Run +
Progression
12 miles easy
+ 30 min.
“moderate”
Throughout the training cycle, to help
transform race endurance into race-specific
endurance
Fartlek Run
+
2 miles easy
4 miles: 1 min.
Late fundamental period, as a way to
incorporate two types of specific-endurance
--- PAGE 86 ---
Progression @ 10K pace /
1 min. easy
2 miles easy
2 miles hard
training stimulus within a longer Sunday run
Threshold Runs
Threshold training is a major part of every running coach’s training
system, but it is practiced differently from one system to the next. In
my adaptive running system, “threshold training” refers to workouts
that focus on efforts at 2.5-hour maximum pace (i.e., the fastest pace
you could sustain for 2.5 hours, or a little faster than marathon race
pace for most competitive runners), 90-minute maximum pace (i.e.,
the fastest pace you could sustain for 90 minutes, or somewhere
near half-marathon race pace), and one-hour maximum pace (i.e.,
the fastest pace you could sustain for one hour, or somewhere
between half-marathon and 10K pace). I have other workouts that
focus on these pace levels—for example, long intervals at 10K pace
may serve as a specific-endurance workout in the sharpening period
of a 10K program—but threshold workouts always focus on one or
more of these pace levels, and all of my runners do them, regardless
of their race distance.
Threshold runs should be challenging, but not exhaustively so, in
most cases. They are meant to provide fitness support for your
toughest, most race-specific workouts, not to be your toughest, most
race-specific workouts. You should finish your threshold workouts
feeling hungry for a little more. When you incorporate well-designed
threshold workouts into a nicely balanced training program, you can
accomplish a hefty amount of work in these workouts and still finish
them hungry.
--- PAGE 87 ---
The fitness adaptations you derive from your threshold workouts
will enable you to tackle a higher workload in subsequent threshold
workouts, and you should take advantage of this opportunity. You
can increase the workload of your threshold workouts by making
them longer (for example, advancing from 2 × 10 minutes at half-
marathon pace to 2 × 15 minutes at half-marathon pace) and by
making them faster (for example, by advancing from 2 × 15 minutes
at half-marathon pace to 15 minutes at half-marathon pace plus 15
minutes accelerating from half-marathon to 10K pace). Increasing
both the volume and intensity of threshold running from one workout
to the next is usually not a good idea, because it increases the
training stress level faster than your aerobic system can adapt.
Begin doing formal threshold runs at the start of the fundamental
period. Prepare for them in the introductory period by doing a
sequence of increasingly challenging progression runs. Throughout
the fundamental period, increase the duration of threshold running,
the pace of threshold running, or the proportion of threshold running
at faster pace levels from one threshold workout to the next, except
when you need or wish to reduce your workload to promote recovery
or you choose to do an easier threshold run within the same week as
a harder one.
Your threshold training should peak with a workout emphasizing
the pace associated with the optimal level of aerobic support for your
peak-race distance. The total amount of threshold running performed
in this workout should represent the largest amount you can do
without reaching the point of extreme fatigue. The hardest threshold
workout my elite runners do is a progression of 3 × 15 minutes with
the first effort at 2.5-hour pace, the second effort at 90-minute pace,
and the third effort at one-hour pace, with 4-minute active recoveries
between efforts and a long warm-up and a cool-down. A workout
featuring the same basic format, but with 10-or 12-minute efforts
replacing the 15-minute efforts, would be a more appropriate peak
threshold workout for the average competitive runner.
--- PAGE 88 ---
An aerobic test is a special type of threshold workout that’s
designed specifically to assess aerobic fitness. The format I most
often employ is four miles of running at half-marathon pace at the
track (between a long warm-up and a cool-down). The twist is that
you should wear a heart-rate monitor during this workout and control
your pace not by split times but by keeping your heart rate at the
level associated with half-marathon racing. Each time you repeat this
workout, you should find your four-mile time improving at the same
heart rate.
There are many other effective formats for threshold runs. There is
no exact science to guide your selection of the most appropriate
format for any given moment in your fitness development. The most
important factor is the progression. If a threshold-run format moves
you a step closer to the level of aerobic support you will need to
achieve your peak-race goal, then it’s a good workout. Table 3.3
presents four basic threshold-run formats and guidelines on their
best use.
Table 3.3 Threshold-Run Formats
Threshold-
Run
Format
Example Best Use
Threshold
Run (One
Interval)
2 miles
easy
4 miles
@ half-
marathon
pace
2 miles
easy
Do shorter versions of this workout in the early
fundamental period to build aerobic support, and do
longer versions in the late fundamental and
sharpening periods to finish the job.
--- PAGE 89 ---
Threshold
Run (Two
Intervals)
2 miles
easy
15 min.
@ half-
marathon
pace
2 min.
easy
15 min.
@ 10K
pace
2 miles
easy
Dividing threshold running into two separate intervals
is slightly easier than doing the same amount of
running in one block, but it can make for a more
challenging workout if you take advantage of the
recovery opportunity to perform more total threshold
running.
Threshold
Run (Three
Intervals)
2 miles
easy
10 min.
@
marathon
pace
1 min.
easy
10 min.
@ half-
marathon
pace
1 min.
easy
10 min.
@ 10K
pace
2 miles
easy
This workout is a great way to hit all three major
threshold-pace levels within a single workout.
Aerobic
Test
2 miles
easy
4 miles
@ half-
marathon
This workout is a good way to measure your
progress in building aerobic support.
--- PAGE 90 ---
heart
rate
2 miles
easy
Long Runs
The first job of the long run progression (here I’m using the word
“progression” in the standard sense, which has nothing to do with
progression runs) that you undertake over the course of a training
cycle is to ensure that you have more than enough endurance and
durability to go the distance in your peak race. This job is easily
accomplished for all runners at the 5K and 10K distances. It’s not too
challenging for most runners at the half-marathon distance, but it
certainly requires more emphasis. And at the marathon distance, it’s
a big job for almost every runner.
The second job of long runs is to increase the speed that runners
can sustain over long distances to the level needed to achieve their
race goals. If your goal is just to finish a race, as it is for many first-
time marathon runners, then job 1 and job 2 of long runs are the
same. In most other cases they are distinct. Different types of long
runs are appropriate to each job. Workouts whose primary purpose
is to increase your raw endurance, or range, should be performed at
an easy pace. Workouts whose primary purpose is to boost your
speed over long distances should be well within your maximal
distance range.
Your first long run in the introductory period should be easy and
only 10 to 15 percent longer than your longest recent run. Your
longest long run should be long enough to ensure that raw
endurance is not a limiter with respect to your peak-race goal. As a
general rule, the longer your peak race is, the more you will need to
--- PAGE 91 ---
emphasize building raw endurance with easy long runs, and the
higher your initial level of raw endurance is, the more you will be able
to benefit from faster long runs. Thus, inexperienced runners training
to “just finish” a marathon will put the heaviest emphasis on easy
long runs, while very fit runners training for a 5K peak race will put
the heaviest emphasis on faster long runs.
I believe that one designated long run per week, almost every
week, is the optimal frequency for all runners. Doing long runs more
often will seldom enhance your endurance adaptations any further
and will only get in the way of other types of training. On the other
hand, doing them less often will cause your endurance to decline.
Table 3.4 presents five distinct long-run formats, an example of
each, and information about the best use for each.
Table 3.4 Long-Run Formats
Long-Run
Format
Example Best Use
Easy Long
Run
14 miles
@ easy
pace
Introductory-period long runs for less-fit runners
Moderate
Long Run
14 miles
@
moderate
pace
Introductory-period long runs for fitter runners; also
appropriate throughout training cycle for runners
preparing to “just finish” a half-marathon or
marathon
Long
Fartlek Run
4 miles
easy
Provides increased intensity for long runs in late
fundamental and sharpening periods
--- PAGE 92 ---
5 × 1K @
marathon
pace/1K
easy
4 miles
easy
Long
Progression
Run
10 miles
easy + 4
miles hard
Provides increased intensity for long runs in late
fundamental and sharpening periods
Marathon-
Pace Run
10 miles
easy
6 miles @
marathon
pace
Sharpening workout for marathon peak race
Aerobic-Support Training Progressions for the 5K, 10K,
Half-Marathon, and Marathon
I’ve given you some general guidelines for using progression runs,
threshold runs, and long runs to develop aerobic support for various
race distances. Let’s now take a slightly more detailed look at how
these workouts are used to develop event-specific aerobic support
across the three periods of adaptive running in preparation for peak
racing of the 5K, 10K, the half-marathon, and the marathon.
The following four tables present sample training plans for each of
these distances with all workouts removed except for the core
aerobic-support development workouts: progression runs, threshold
runs, and long runs. Note that easy runs, although a form of aerobic
training that makes an important contribution to total volume, are
also left out for the sake of clarity. However, weekly mileage totals
--- PAGE 93 ---
are listed to show how volume contributes to aerobic-support
development in the plans. Mileage levels for all four plans are
appropriate for the “competitive” category of runners in table 3.1.
Also note that while the introductory, fundamental, and sharpening
periods are referred to in the text accompanying each table, the
training schedules are not formally divided into distinct periods, in
keeping with the adaptive running characteristic of blended training
periods. You can mentally distinguish the periods in an approximate
manner by dividing each schedule into roughly equal thirds.
Aerobic-Support Training Progression for a 5K Peak
Race
This table shows an example of the progression runs, threshold
runs, and long runs that might be done in a 12-week adaptive
running training plan culminating in a 5K peak race. As you can see,
the overall reliance on these types of workouts is fairly light. That’s
because the adaptive running system makes heavy use of high-
intensity fartlek runs and interval sessions for 5K training. Since
those types of workouts do not count as aerobic-support training,
they are not shown.
Week
#
Sunday Friday Total
Miles
1 Long Run
6 miles easy
20
2 Long Run
7 miles easy
24
--- PAGE 94 ---
3 Progression Run
8 miles, last 5 min.
moderate
26
4 Progression Run
9 miles, last 10 min.
moderate
30
5 Progression Run
10 miles, last 15 min.
moderate
29
6 Progression Run
11 miles, last 20 min.
moderate
35
7 Long Run
10 miles easy
Threshold Run
2 miles easy
3 miles @ half-marathon pace
2 miles easy
37
8 Progression Run
12 miles, last 20 min.
moderate
34
9 Long Run
12 miles easy
Threshold Run
2 miles easy
2 × 2 miles @ half-marathon pace
w/2-min. active recovery 
2 miles easy
40
10 Long Run
12 miles easy
Threshold Run
2 miles easy
5 miles @ 10K pace w/2-min. active
38
--- PAGE 95 ---
recovery
2 miles easy
11 Long Run
10 miles easy
Threshold Run
2 miles easy
3 × 2 miles @ 10K pace w/2-min.
active recoveries
2 miles easy
39
12 Long Run
8 miles easy 27*1
Aerobic-Support Training Progression for a 10K Peak
Race
This table shows an example of the progression runs, threshold
runs, and long runs that might be done in a 14-week adaptive
running training plan culminating in a 10K peak race. Progression
runs are used not only to add intensity to Sunday long runs, as in the
5K plan above, but also during the week in the introductory period to
prepare the body for threshold runs in the fundamental period.
Threshold runs are relied on more heavily in this plan than in the 5K
plan because the running paces targeted in threshold runs are more
specific to the 10K distance.
Week
#
Sunday Friday Total
Miles
1 Long Run
6 miles easy
26
--- PAGE 96 ---
2 Long Run
7 miles easy
28
3 Progression Run
8 miles, last 20
min. moderate
30
4 Progression Run
9 miles, last 20
min. hard
33
5 Progression Run
10 miles, last 20
min. moderate
Progression Run
6 miles, last 10 min. moderate
34
6 Progression Run
7 miles, last 15 min. moderate
35
7 Progression Run
12 miles, last 30
min. moderate
Progression Run
7 miles, last 20 min. moderate
39
8 Progression Run
10 miles, last 20
min. hard
Threshold Run
2 miles easy
2 × 15 min. @ marathon/half-marathon
pace w/2-min. active recovery
2 miles easy
37
9 Threshold Run
2 miles easy
2 × 10 min. @ marathon/half-marathon
39
--- PAGE 97 ---
pace w/2-min. active recovery
2 miles easy
10 Progression Run
12 miles, last 20
min. moderate
Threshold Run
2 miles easy
10 min. @ marathon pace
10 min. @ half-marathon pace
10 min. @ half-marathon/10K pace
2 miles easy
41
11 Progression Run
10 miles, last 15
min. hard
Threshold Run
2 miles easy
2 x 15 min. @ half-marathon pace w/ 1-
min. active recovery
2 miles easy
42
12 Progression Run
12 miles, last 20
min. moderate
Aerobic Test
2 miles easy
4 miles @ half-marathon heart rate
2 miles easy
46
13 Progression Run
11 miles, last 10
min. hard
Threshold Run
2 miles easy
2 x 15 min. @ half-marathon/10K pace w/
1-min. active recovery
2 miles easy
39
14 Long Run
10 miles easy 40*2
Aerobic-Support Training Progression for a Half-
Marathon Peak Race
--- PAGE 98 ---
This table shows an example of the progression runs, threshold
runs, and long runs that might be done in a 16-week adaptive
running training plan culminating in a half-marathon peak race.
There is a greater reliance on progression runs than in the shorter-
distance plans. These sessions take the place of higher-intensity
workouts that are emphasized at the shorter distances (but are not
included in these tables, which show only aerobic-support workouts).
The long runs are longer to provide adequate endurance for a race
distance that is more than double the 10K distance, and the
threshold workouts emphasize half-marathon pace.
Week
#
Sunday Thursday Friday Total
Miles
1 Long Run
6 miles easy
28
2 Long Run
7 miles easy
34
3 Progression
Run
8 miles, last 10
min. moderate
Progression Run
8 miles, last 10 min. moderate
40
4 Progression
Run
9 miles, last 15
min. moderate
Progression
Run 6 miles,
last 10 min.
moderate
Progression Run 8 miles, last
15 min. moderate
42
5 Progression
Run
Progression Run
8 miles, last 20 min. moderate
40
--- PAGE 99 ---
8 miles, last 15
min. moderate
(uphill, if
possible)
6 Progression
Run
9 miles, last 20
min. moderate
(uphill, if
possible)
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 10 min. @ half-
marathon pace 5 min. easy 10
min. @ half-marathon/10K
pace 2 miles easy
42
7 Progression
Run
10 miles, last 20
min. hard (uphill,
if possible)
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 15 min. @ half-
marathon pace 5 min. easy 15
min. @ half-marathon/10K
pace 2 miles easy
44
8 Progression
Run
10 miles, last 30
min. moderate
(uphill, if
possible)
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 15 min. @ half-
marathon pace 15 min. @
half-marathon/10K pace 2
miles easy
48
9 Progression
Run
13 miles, last 30
min. hard (uphill,
if possible)
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 15 min. @ half-
marathon pace 1 min. easy 15
min. @ half-marathon/10K
pace 2 miles easy
48
10 Progression
Run
12 miles, last 20
min. moderate
Aerobic Test
2 miles easy 4 miles @ half-
marathon heart rate 2 miles
easy
43
--- PAGE 100 ---
11 Fartlek Run +
Progression
2 miles easy
4 miles: 1 min.
@ 10K pace/ 1
min. easy
2 miles easy
2 miles hard
Threshold Run 2 miles easy 6
miles @ half-marathon pace 2
miles easy
51
12 Progression
Run
14 miles, last 20
min. moderate
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 4 miles @
marathon pace
5 min. easy 4 miles @ half-
marathon pace
1 mile easy
53
13 Long Fartlek
Run
4 miles easy
4 miles: 90 sec.
@ half-
marathon–10K
pace/90 sec.
easy
4 miles easy
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 4 miles @
marathon pace 4 miles @
half-marathon pace 1 mile
easy
46
14 Easy Run
14 miles
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 2 × 4 miles @
half-marathon pace w/5-min.
active recovery 1 mile easy
51
15 Progression
Run
12 miles, last 30
min. moderate
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 15 min. @ half-
marathon pace 1 min. easy 15
min. @ half-marathon/10K
pace 2 miles easy
48
--- PAGE 101 ---
16 Progression
Run
10 miles, last 20
min. moderate
Threshold
Run
2 miles easy
4 miles @
half-marathon
pace
2 miles easy
44*3
Aerobic-Support Training Progression for a Marathon
Peak Race
This table shows an example of the progression runs, threshold
runs, and long runs that might be done in a 20-week adaptive
running training plan culminating in a marathon peak race. There is
an even greater reliance on progression runs than in the half-
marathon plan, and the long runs are longer. In the fundamental and
sharpening periods there is heavy use of marathon-pace and longer
fartlek runs with progressions, which serve to transform raw
endurance into specific endurance for the marathon.
Week
#
Sunday Tuesday Wednesday Friday Total
Miles
1 Long Run
12 miles easy
Progression
Run
10 miles,
last 5 miles
moderate
Progression
Run
8 miles, last 10
min. moderate
41
2 Long Run
14 miles easy
Progression
Run 12
Progression
Run
46
--- PAGE 102 ---
miles, last 6
miles
moderate
8 miles, last 10
min. moderate
3 Long Run
16 miles easy
Progression
Run
9 miles, last 15
min. moderate
48
4 Progression Run
14 miles, last 20
min. moderate
(uphill, if
possible)
Progression
Run
9 miles, last 15
min. moderate
53
5 Progression Run
15 miles, last 30
min. moderate
(uphill, if
possible)
Progression
Run
2 miles easy 6
miles
moderate 2
miles easy
51
6 Long Run
17 miles easy
Progression
Run 10
miles, last 6
miles
moderate
60
7 Marathon-Pace
Run
1 mile easy 10
miles @
marathon pace +
10–20 sec./mile
1 mile easy
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 2
× 15 min. @
half-marathon
pace w/2-min.
active
recovery 3
miles easy
55
--- PAGE 103 ---
8 Progression Run
16 miles, last 30
min. hard (uphill,
if possible)
Progression
Run 10
miles, last 8
miles hard
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 5
miles @ half-
marathon pace
2 miles easy
59
9 Fartlek Run +
Progression 6
miles easy 5
miles: 1 min. @
10K pace/1 min.
easy 1 mile easy
2 miles hard
51
10 Long Run
8 miles easy
60
11 Fartlek Run +
Progression 6
miles easy 5
miles: 90 sec. @
10K pace/90
sec. easy
2 miles easy
3 miles hard
Progression
Run 10 miles,
last 15 min.
moderate
57
12 Long Run
17 miles easy
Threshold Run
2 miles easy 6
miles @
marathon/half-
marathon pace
2 miles easy
50
13 Marathon-Pace Threshold Run 60
--- PAGE 104 ---
Run 2 miles
easy 14 miles @
marathon pace +
10–20 sec./mile
2 miles easy
3 miles easy 3
× 10 min. @
half-marathon
pace w/3-min.
active
recoveries 3
miles easy
14 Long Run
20 miles easy
60
15 Marathon-Pace
Run 2 miles
easy 13.1 miles
@ marathon
goal pace 2
miles easy
Progression
Run 3 miles
easy 6 miles
moderate 2
miles easy
50
16 Long Run
22 miles easy
60
17 Marathon-Pace
Run 2 miles
easy 15 miles @
marathon pace +
10 sec./mi. 3
miles easy
Progression
Run 9 miles,
last 6 miles
accelerate
from marathon
pace + 20
sec./mile to
marathon pace
60
18 Long Run
23 miles easy
Threshold Run
2 miles easy
2 × 15 min. @
half-marathon
pace w/3-min.
Marathon-
Pace Run 1
mile easy 8
miles @
marathon pace
1 mile easy
62
--- PAGE 105 ---
active recovery
2 miles easy
19 Marathon-Pace
Run 18 miles @
marathon pace +
20–30 sec./mile
Marathon-
Pace
Run
1 mile easy 2
× 4 miles @
marathon pace
w/5-min. active
recovery
1 mile easy
51
20 Long Run
13 miles easy
Marathon-Pace
Run 2 miles
easy 4 miles @
marathon
pace-10
sec./mile 3
miles easy
53*4
--- PAGE 106 ---
Jason Hartmann © Alison Wade
Runner Profile: Jason Hartmann
Jason Hartmann has been somewhat overshadowed by his former
high school teammate, Dathan Ritzenhein, who graduated from
Maryland’s Rockford High School two years after Jason. But Jason
is a supremely talented runner in his own right, and I am excited to
be his coach.
During his college years at the University of Oregon, Jason
underperformed, in part because his coach intentionally limited his
training, as Jason was relatively new to running, having pursued
basketball as his primary sport until his junior year of high school,
and in part because of injury problems. Given this background, when
Jason came to me for help in becoming an elite professional runner,
--- PAGE 107 ---
I knew that we had to start by sharply increasing his mileage, to build
the aerobic foundation that Dathan already had in place when he
started working with me.
It takes time to build a solid aerobic foundation, so I did not race
him heavily in his first year and went light on specific training, but
Jason still managed to achieve some outstanding results in his first
year under my guidance, including a 14th-place finish at the 2004
World Half-Marathon Championship. The terrific improvement Jason
achieved with this approach underscored my conviction that younger
and less-experienced runners can never go wrong by emphasizing
basic aerobic training: frequent running, long runs, and lots of miles.
After Jason had a year of consistent high-volume training in his
legs, I began to introduce more specific training, which has had the
desired effect. He continues to get stronger, and I am confident that
he will be a sub-28:00 10K runner and a 2:10 marathoner before all
is said and done.
--- PAGE 108 ---
Muscle Training 4
         
Without a brain, you couldn’t run. The act of running literally begins
and ends in the brain. It begins when your brain’s motor centers
create electrical impulses that travel through your spinal cord and
motor nerves and into your muscles, causing them to contract (or
shorten). Running often ends in fatigue, which is caused mainly by a
self-protective inhibition of motor impulses from the brain that occurs
in response to feedback signals from the body warning of impending
harm (resulting from overheating, energy depletion, loss of acid-base
balance in the muscles, or another factor) if running continues. And
between the beginning and the end of a run, the brain governs and
regulates every process that contributes to your running, from heart
rate and breathing rate to stride technique.
The physiological essence of running is two-way communication—
feed-forward and feedback—between the brain and the muscles.
The term “neuromuscular” is used in reference to these
communications. The feed-forward part of the process happens
when the brain sends electrical impulses to the muscles that cause
them to contract and relax in an intricately coordinated pattern that
produces the running stride. The muscles, in turn, send back to the
--- PAGE 109 ---
brain a variety of signals, which provide information that helps the
brain refine the running action. For example, proprioceptive nerves in
the muscles and connective tissues transmit information that allows
you to feel your running and react accordingly, perhaps by leaning
into a steep hill. The muscles also release chemical signals that
inform the brain regarding the level of acidity in the muscles, the
amount of muscle damage that has accumulated, the amount of fuel
remaining in the active muscles, and the temperature of the muscles.
Many of the physiological changes that lead to better running
ability are neuromuscular in nature. Improvements in brain-muscle
communications may increase power efficiency, running economy,
and fatigue resistance.
Power
Running is not typically thought of as a power sport, but it truly is.
Power is the rapid application of force. In the case of running, power
has to do with the rapid application of force to the ground, which then
returns this energy to the foot, propelling the body forward. The more
force your foot applies to the ground, and the less time it takes to
apply it, the more powerfully the ground will push your body forward.
There are several specific neuromuscular adaptations that
increase stride power. The most important one is an increase in the
number of muscle fibers within the working muscles that your brain
can activate simultaneously. When you contract a muscle with all of
your strength—for example, when showing off your biceps muscle—
you may assume that all of the fibers in that muscle are active. But
they are not. The average person is only able to activate roughly half
of the fibers in a given muscle when contracting it with maximal
effort. Training may increase the number of muscle fibers within a
given muscle that you can activate simultaneously, resulting in
greater maximal force and power output.
--- PAGE 110 ---
Another power-boosting neuromuscular adaptation is an increase
in motor-unit firing rate. A motor unit is a bundle of muscle fibers that
is fed by a single motor nerve. “Motor-unit firing rate” refers to the
time that elapses between the instant your brain generates a
command for a muscle to contract and the time that contraction
begins. Training may shorten this span, allowing the muscles to
apply force more rapidly.
Power is always movement-specific, meaning that improved power
in one activity does not automatically transfer over to other activities.
This is partly due to the fact that a portion of power gains is
accounted for by improved coordination, and different activities
require different coordination patterns. So the best way to improve
running power is by running and by doing other exercises that are
very similar to running, such as single-leg jumping drills.
The best distance runners are able to produce more power in the
stride action than average runners can. Yet the best distance
runners are not able to generate as much stride power as the best
sprinters. The reason is that power is just about the only thing that is
needed for performance in short sprints, whereas power is just one
of several requirements for success in distance running. As we saw
in the previous chapter, distance runners also need a high aerobic
capacity. To some degree, however, aerobic capacity and power are
mutually exclusive, because maximal-power efforts derive almost all
of their energy from anaerobic metabolism. Thus, if you spend too
much time training to increase your maximal stride power, you will
enhance the anaerobic characteristics of your running muscles at the
expense of their aerobic characteristics and your improvements in
aerobic capacity will be limited.
Distance runners must also be economical, meaning that they
must use energy very efficiently. Some of the physiological changes
that increase maximal power reduce efficiency, starting with muscle
growth. Top sprinters tend to have large muscles and relatively high
body weights. But body weight and running economy are inversely
--- PAGE 111 ---
related. The more you weigh, the more energy is required to run at
any given speed. Therefore distance runners don’t really want to
improve their raw power so much as they want to increase what I call
their power efficiency. In other words, they want to increase the
amount of stride power they can generate at the highest level of
energy expenditure (or oxygen consumption) that they can sustain
for the entire distance of a race.
Every race exceeding 200 meters is run at a submaximal power-
output level. In a 1,500-meter race you might sustain an average of
60 percent of maximal stride power from start to finish. In a marathon
the figure will be closer to 40 percent. There are two power-related
ways to improve your race time at any distance. First, you can
increase your maximal stride power in a way that does not diminish
the average percentage of maximal stride power output that you can
sustain throughout the race. For example, suppose that, by
incorporating a small amount of maximal-power training into an
adaptive running program targeting a marathon peak race, you
increase your maximal sprint speed from 7.5 meters per second to
7.8 meters per second—a 4-percent improvement. Because your
program is well balanced, your power gains do not come at the
expense of aerobic capacity or running economy, so the percentage
of maximal power that you can sustain in a marathon remains
unchanged. As a result, your marathon time will probably improve by
roughly 4 percent. Thus, if your previous best marathon time was
3:00:00, your next marathon might be completed in 2:52:48.
A second power-related way to boost your running performance is
to increase the average percentage of your maximal power output
that you can sustain throughout a race. You will achieve this effect by
following a training program that increases your aerobic capacity and
running economy through high volume and challenging aerobic
workouts and just enough training at very high intensities to prevent
a decline in maximal stride power.
--- PAGE 112 ---
By following a well-balanced training regimen that features a little
more than the minimal amount of high-intensity training, including
some maximal-power work, you can achieve both of the above-
described benefits simultaneously: improved maximal stride power
and an increase in the average power level you can sustain in races.
Economy
The term “running economy” refers to the energy cost of running at
a given speed. Reducing the energy cost of running at your goal
race pace will help you sustain that pace all the way to the finish line.
There are three interrelated neuromuscular changes that enhance
running economy.
The most fundamental change is improved stride technique. The
frequent and varied practice of the running stride that comes with a
good training program leads to all kinds of adjustments in stride
technique, most of them fairly subtle, which reduce the energy cost
of running. For example, proper training may reduce a tendency to
overstride—that is, to reach the leg out in front of the body and touch
the foot to the ground heel first instead of making ground contact flat-
footed with the foot directly underneath the body. Including technique
drills as a regular component of your training will provide an
additional stimulus for technique improvement.
A second neuromuscular adaptation that improves stride economy
is a stiffening of the stride. The human body acts as a sort of spring
during running. When your foot hits the ground, impact forces are
sent from your body into the ground and are immediately returned
from the ground into your body, providing forward propulsion. A stiff
spring is more efficient than a loose spring because it delivers and
receives impact force very quickly, so that little of this energy is lost
through dissipation. In the same way, a runner who makes ground
contact with a stiffer leg and body is likely to be more economical
than a “looser” runner. In this case, stiffness comes from a tensing of
--- PAGE 113 ---
the muscles in the moment preceding footstrike, resulting in a faster
energy return from the ground and less energy loss through
dissipation. Stiffness also enhances the stability of the knee, hip, and
pelvis, minimizing the amount of impact energy that is lost through
unwanted lateral movement at these joints while the foot is in contact
with the ground.
Approximately half of the energy that is used to propel a runner
forward is not supplied by muscle metabolism but is instead “free
energy” supplied by impact forces. When the foot hits the ground,
various muscles and tendons stretch beyond their natural length,
capturing energy from impact forces. As these tissues return to their
normal length, they release the energy, providing an impulse for
forward movement. A runner with a stiffer stride may get slightly
more than 50 percent of the energy required to run at a given speed
from the ground, while a runner with a looser stride may get less.
Proper training increases stride stiffness and the contribution of
“free” elastic energy to forward movement, and hence improves
running economy. The specific types of training that increase stride
stiffness most are short hill sprints, power drills such as skipping,
and short, fast intervals.
Training also reduces the amount of wasteful muscular “co-
contraction” that occurs during running. Co-contraction is the tensing
of muscles opposing the working muscles at various points in the
stride action. For example, during the swing phase of the stride,
when the thigh is moving forward, the hip flexors (the muscles that
connect the thigh to the torso on the front of the body) are the
primary working muscles. The gluteal muscles of the buttocks are
directly opposed to the hip flexors. Their job at this point of the stride
is to relax and stretch. Any tension in the gluteal muscles will create
resistance requiring the hip flexors to work harder to pull the thigh
forward. A certain amount of co-contraction is necessary at most
times to stabilize joints and guide the direction of movements, but
less experienced and less fit runners exhibit excessive co-
contraction that does nothing but waste energy.
--- PAGE 114 ---
Training causes a natural reduction in unnecessary co-contraction
that enhances running economy. You don’t have to make any special
efforts in your training to reduce wasteful co-contraction in your
stride. It will diminish automatically as a result of your maintaining a
high or relatively high volume and including plenty of variation in your
program.
Fatigue Resistance
A neuromuscular phenomenon known as “motor-unit cycling” is
very important in relation to running endurance. This phenomenon
involves the rotating activation of individual motor units in the
working muscles over the course of a prolonged running effort.
During running, only 20 to 30 percent of the motor units in your
working muscles are active simultaneously. But it’s not the same 20
to 30 percent of motor units that are active throughout a run. On the
contrary, most of the motor units in the working muscles contribute to
the running effort at various times over the course of a run, but none
are active all the time. Instead, they take turns: While some are
active, others rest, awaiting their next turn. This cycling of motor
units allows you to run much farther than you could if any of the
motor units in your working muscles were forced to remain
constantly active.
Training produces refinements in motor-unit cycling that increase
endurance. Different cycling patterns are used at different intensities
of running, so the biggest improvements in endurance will come at
the running intensities you emphasize most in your training.
In every runner, there are many motor units in the running muscles
that the brain seldom or never uses. These least-preferred motor
units are those that contain the largest numbers of fast-twitch muscle
fibers, which are normally called upon in two circumstances: when a
maximal-intensity effort is demanded, and when a large number of
--- PAGE 115 ---
the more-preferred slow-twitch muscle fibers are already tired from
previous activity.
Increasing the total number of motor units that your brain is able to
activate during running gives a boost to motor-unit cycling by
creating a larger pool of motor units that can be called upon,
resulting in more rest time for each motor unit in the pool. The two
types of training that are most effective in expanding this pool are
maximum-intensity efforts such as hill sprints and very long runs.
Muscle Training Defined
I use the term “muscle training” to denote training practices whose
primary purpose is to stimulate neuromuscular adaptations that
enhance running performance. Strictly speaking, every type of
workout constitutes muscle training in the sense that every type of
workout has some effect on the neuromuscular system. But as a
practical matter, I prefer to limit the definition of muscle training to
workouts and drills that increase stride power and fatigue resistance
at faster speeds. There are three general groups of training methods
that fit this definition: hill sprints and hill repetitions; speed intervals;
and strides and drills.
The characteristic that unites all of these training methods is that
they entail very high-intensity, largely anaerobic efforts. They call for
the nervous system to activate very large numbers of motor units, to
fire these motor units quickly, to contract the muscles with great
force, and to resist fatigue at maximal and near-maximal intensity
levels. They test the limits of the neuromuscular system’s capacity to
generate and sustain running-specific speed and power and thereby
push back these limits. By engaging in regular, progressive muscle
training, you will improve your brain-muscle communications in ways
that increase your power efficiency, running economy, and fatigue
resistance.
--- PAGE 116 ---
Muscle training represents half of the foundation that supports
specific endurance, or the physiological capacity to run the full
distance of a race at your goal pace. The other half of this foundation
is, of course, aerobic support, which was discussed in the previous
chapter. To achieve a higher level of specific endurance, you must
first build a higher level of aerobic support and neuromuscular
fitness. Broadly speaking, aerobic-support training and muscle
training move toward specific endurance from opposite ends of the
spectrum of running fitness. If the most foundational sort of aerobic-
support workout is a long run at a slow pace (or better yet, a whole
week of long runs at a slow pace), then the most foundational sort of
muscle-training effort is an all-out sprint lasting only a few seconds.
The general progression pattern of muscle training is the same for
all runners, regardless of their peak-race distance. The first priority is
to increase maximal running-specific strength and stride power.
Next, power and strength are transformed into speed. Finally, speed
is gradually extended into specific endurance. A small amount of
work is done to maintain power and strength as the training focus
turns toward speed and then specific endurance, and to maintain
speed as the training focus turns toward specific endurance.
Short hill sprints are the primary means of first increasing and then
maintaining specific strength and stride power. Hill repetitions help to
build a “fitness bridge” between strength and speed. The primary tool
for speed development is speed intervals, or short intervals run at 5K
pace and faster. Strides, which consist of very short (about 100-
meter) intervals, usually at 1,500-meter pace, are essentially a form
of speed interval used in warm-ups and cool-downs. Drills are also
used in warm-ups and serve to develop and maintain power
efficiency.
Let’s now take a closer look at each of these three groups of
muscle-training methods. Then I will show you how these methods
are used in the adaptive running system to develop race-specific
neuromuscular fitness for the 5K, 10K, half-marathon, and marathon.
--- PAGE 117 ---
Hill Sprints and Hill Repetitions
If you have never done a steep hill sprint before, you should not
leap into a set of 10 steep hill sprints the very first time you try them,
especially if you are over age 30. These efforts place a tremendous
amount of stress on the muscles and connective tissues. Thus, the
beginner is at some risk of suffering a muscle or tendon strain or
another such acute injury when performing steep hill sprints. Once
your legs have adapted to the stress that steep hill sprints impose,
this workout actually protects against injury. But you must proceed
with caution until you get over the hump of those early adaptations.
The whole point of steep hill sprints is to demand a truly maximal-
power effort. For this reason, they should be very short. Your first
session, performed after completion of an easy run, should consist of
just one or two 8-second sprints on a steep gradient of
approximately 6 to 8 percent. If you don’t know what a 6-to 8-percent
gradient looks or feels like, get on a treadmill and adjust the incline
to 6 percent. After you’ve had the experience of running on this
gradient, you can find a hill that matches it.
Your first session will stimulate physiological adaptations that
serve to better protect your muscles and connective tissues from
damage in your next session. Known to exercise scientists as the
“repeated bout effect,” these adaptations occur very quickly. If you
do your first steep hill sprint workout on a Monday, you will be ready
to do another session by Thursday—and you will almost certainly
experience less muscle soreness after this second session.
Thanks to the repeated bout effect, you can increase your steep
hill sprint training fairly rapidly and thereby develop stride power
quickly. First, increase the number of 8-second sprints you perform
by one or two per session per week. Once you’re doing 8 to 10
sprints, you may move to 10-second sprints and a slightly steeper
hill. After a few more weeks, you may advance to 12-second sprints
on a 10-percent gradient, if you feel the need to further increase your
--- PAGE 118 ---
stride power. Always allow yourself the opportunity to recover fully
between individual sprints within a session. In other words, rest long
enough so that you are able to cover just as much distance in the
next sprint as you did in the previous one. Simply walking back down
the hill you just ran up should do the trick, but if you need more time,
take it.
Most runners will achieve as much strength and power
improvement as they can get by doing 10 to 12 hill sprints of 10 to 12
seconds each, twice a week. Once you have reached this level and
have stopped gaining strength and power, you can cut back to one
set of 6 to 10 hill sprints per week. This level of maximal power
training will suffice to maintain your gains through the remainder of
the training cycle.
Hill repetitions—as opposed to short hill sprints—may be used in
the later introductory period and early fundamental period to build a
fitness bridge between strength and speed. There are two types of
runner who benefit most from hill repetitions. For very “fast-twitch”
runners who specialize in shorter races and tend to peak quickly
when they start doing intensive speed work on the track, hill
repetitions represent a way to delay the introduction of intensive
speed work and to further elevate the runner’s fitness level before
intensive speed training begins. Hill repetitions are also beneficial for
injury-prone runners, and especially those who tend to get injured
when running fast. Running at high intensities uphill involves less
impact force and less tissue strain than running at the same intensity
on level ground. In addition, hills add a strength-boosting element to
running at high intensity that reduces injury susceptibility.
Four to six relatively short hill interval sessions will suffice even for
those runners who need them the most. It’s not the type of training
that you should belabor, because it’s really meant to be transitional.
Here’s a very basic example of a sensible four-week hill interval
progression:
--- PAGE 119 ---
Week 1: 6 × 200 meters
Week 2: 6 × 300 meters
Week 3: 6 × 400 meters
Week 4: 5 × 600 meters
These sessions may be performed after an easy run or a long
warm-up or after a threshold run. Run your hill repetitions on a
somewhat shallower gradient than your steep hill sprints (4 to 6
percent). Do shorter hill repetitions (200–300 meters) at roughly
1,500-meter effort and longer ones (400–600 meters) at roughly 3K
effort. Time each repetition to make sure you aren’t slowing down in
the later intervals. As with steep hill sprints, allow yourself to recover
fully between hill repetitions. Jogging very slowly back down the hill
should do the trick.
After you’ve completed four to six hill repetition sessions in the
later introductory period and/or early fundamental period, you should
be ready to take on some challenging interval workouts at the track.
That said, you don’t necessarily have to wait until you’ve completed
all the hill repetition training you plan to do before you start running
intervals on the track or level ground. But don’t go full-bore with your
speed work until you’ve had a chance to benefit from your hill
repetition workouts, and avoid overtaxing yourself by trying to jam
too much anaerobic training into your schedule.
There is seldom a need to return to hill repetitions later in the
training cycle, once you’ve turned your attention to running fast on
level ground. However, you can and should go back if you feel that
track intervals are breaking your body down, or if you find that you
lack sufficient specific strength.
--- PAGE 120 ---
Speed Intervals
Speed intervals are short or relatively short intervals run faster
than 5K pace. Intervals run at 5K pace are sometimes used as
speed training and sometimes used as specific-endurance training,
depending on the context, and sometimes they serve both purposes
simultaneously. For example, I am more inclined to consider the
shorter 5K-pace intervals that a 5K runner does early in the training
cycle as speed training (i.e., muscle training) and the longer 5K-pace
efforts with short recoveries that the same runner does later in the
training cycle as specific-endurance training. The bottom line is that
the line separating speed training and specific-endurance training is
fuzzy for runners training for shorter events.
In many training systems, road racers, even including
marathoners, perform “speed workouts” consisting of large numbers
of short, fast intervals and concentrate these workouts in a specific
phase that focuses on speed development training. The adaptive
running system is very different in this regard. Conventional speed
workouts are used sparingly in my system, and there is no
concentrated phase of speed development. Short, fast intervals are
sprinkled throughout my programs, and while they are somewhat
concentrated in the early foundation period, you’ll never see my
runners doing 400-meter repeats at 1,500-meter pace every
Tuesday for six straight weeks in this stage of training, as plenty of
other runners do.
In my system, the purpose of speed intervals is to provide
neuromuscular fitness support for specific endurance. To do this
optimally, speed intervals must be performed regularly throughout
the training cycle, but they are never needed in large amounts.
There are three patterns of progression in speed-interval training that
combine to provide optimal neuromuscular fitness support for
specific endurance. First, there should be a general movement from
shorter and faster intervals toward longer and slower (but still fast)
intervals. Second, speed training should become more and more
--- PAGE 121 ---
integrated with specific-endurance training. And third, the overall
emphasis on speed training should decrease to a minimal level in
the sharpening period, especially for longer-distance runners.
I like to introduce speed intervals very early in the training cycle in
the form of fartlek intervals. These usually consist of 20-to 60-second
efforts at 1,500-meter to 10K pace. The precise duration and pace
do not matter particularly. Progression is achieved by increasing the
duration of the efforts (from 20 seconds in the first session to 25 in
the next, and so forth) and by increasing the number of efforts.
Fartlek intervals occur within the context of easy aerobic runs, since
aerobic base building is also a major priority of the introductory
training period. For the sake of developing aerobic fitness, the total
duration of these runs should also increase from week to week.
Fartlek runs are best performed in a pleasant environment, such as
quiet roads or smooth trails, to forestall any tendency to get too
“serious” about them.
In the fundamental period, it’s time to get serious about interval
training. Again, speed intervals in the 5K to 1,500-meter pace range
must be used in a way that serves to progressively develop specific
endurance, and from this perspective, there is no sense in going to
the track and running huge numbers of 200-meter to 400-meter
speed repetitions at 1,500-meter pace. You don’t need to maximize
your efficiency and fatigue resistance at 1,500-meter pace to run
your best half-marathon, or even your best 5K. What you need
instead is to progressively blend what speed you have with the
fatigue resistance you will need to sustain your goal pace over the
full race distance. This requires a deeper integration of running at
paces exceeding race pace into the rest of your training than is seen
in training systems where an intensive block of speed training
precedes a completely separate block of more specific interval
training.
There are two general types of workouts in which 5K-to 1,500-
meter-pace running is used in the fundamental and sharpening
--- PAGE 122 ---
periods: repetition intervals and ladder workouts.
Repetition intervals are intervals of a uniform distance and
intensity: for example, 10 × 400 meters at 3K (or 2-mile) race pace
with 2-minute jogging recoveries. They are useful in systematically
transforming speed into specific endurance. You start with a workout
comprising shorter, faster intervals at the beginning of the
fundamental period and gradually increase the length and reduce the
pace of the intervals throughout the fundamental period. If you’re
training for a 5K, your intervals will become no slower than 5K pace,
which, again, lies at the boundary between muscle training and
specific-endurance training. If you’re training for a 10K, half-
marathon, or marathon, your repetition intervals will increase further
in length and slow down to 10K pace, and will thus no longer
constitute muscle training, by my definition.
You can sustain a maintenance level of speed training in your
schedule by doing a smaller number of speed intervals (or even just
one longer speed interval) as an add-on at the end of a workout
emphasizing slower running. For example, a good specific-
endurance workout for the 10K is 4 × 2K at 10K pace with 1-minute
jogging recoveries plus 1 × 1K at maximal effort. This workout is
most effective during the sharpening period, when training at or very
near 10K goal pace is the highest priority and only a very small
amount of faster muscle training is needed to provide neuromuscular
support.
For half-marathon and marathon runners, speed training in the
fundamental and sharpening periods may take the form of add-on
repetition intervals almost exclusively. For example, you might run a
set of 4 to 8 × 300 meters at 3K pace after a threshold run every
other week. As the duration of your threshold workouts increases,
the number of add-on repetition intervals will decrease.
Ladder workouts are workouts featuring a series of intervals
arranged in order of ascending distance and decreasing pace, or
--- PAGE 123 ---
descending distance and increasing pace, or both. Ladder workouts
represent an effective way to integrate speed training with specific-
endurance training. One of my preferred ladder workouts consists of
time-based intervals arranged as follows: 6 minutes, 5 minutes, 4
minutes, 3 minutes, 2 minutes, and 1 minute, with 1 minute of “active
recovery” jogging at a very slow pace between intervals. The first
interval is run at roughly 10K pace. Each subsequent interval is run
at a pace slightly faster than that of the last, with the final 1-minute
interval run at roughly 1,500-meter pace. This is a good workout for
the early part of the fundamental period, when your specific-
endurance training need not yet be terribly specific.
Shorter, faster ladder workouts may be used to provide a periodic
dose of speed training throughout the fundamental period. For
example, run intervals of 1 minute, 2 minutes, 3 minutes, 2 minutes,
1 minute, 2 minutes, and 3 minutes, at 1,500-meter to 5K pace, with
active recoveries of equal duration following each interval. Run the
shortest intervals fastest and the longest intervals slowest.
--- PAGE 124 ---
A little speed training goes a long way in the adaptive running
system. © Alison Wade
It’s a good idea to run a workout of this sort to establish a speed
performance baseline at the beginning of the fundamental period.
Thanks to the hill work and fartlek intervals you’ve done in the
introductory period, you should be able to perform fairly well in such
a workout at this time. Your objective is to sustain the level of speed
performance you exhibit in this baseline workout throughout the
remainder of the training cycle, even as your training becomes more
and more race-specific. Repeating the ladder once every few weeks
should suffice to ensure that your speed is holding steady, and it will
give your speed the necessary boost if it has slipped.
Below are three basic speed-interval workout formats and
guidelines for their best use.
--- PAGE 125 ---
Table 4.1 Speed-Interval Workout Formats
Speed-
Interval
Workout
Format
Example Best Use
Repetition
Intervals
6 × 800m @ 5K
pace
Done once a week with intervals becoming
progressively slower and longer, these workouts
transform speed into specific endurance.
Ladder
Intervals
6 min., 5 min., 4
min., 3 min., 2
min., 1 min. @
10K–1,500m
pace w/1-min.
jog recoveries
Ladders with longer intervals such as this one
nicely integrate speed and specific endurance
in the early fundamental period; ladders with
shorter intervals provide a good periodic dose
of speed stimulus throughout the fundamental
and sharpening periods.
Add-On
Intervals
20 min.
threshold run @
half-marathon
pace + 4 ×
300m @ 3K
pace
These intervals provide a small, regular dose of
speed training and may be virtually all the
speed training that is needed for half-marathon
and marathon runners in the fundamental and
sharpening periods.
Strides and Drills
Strides and drills serve somewhat different muscle-training
functions, but I lump them together here because I tend to lump
them together in the training of my runners. Specifically, I have my
--- PAGE 126 ---
runners perform strides and drills as part of their warm-up on high-
intensity running days (typically Tuesdays and Fridays). First they do
some easy jogging. Then they complete a set of drills and strides.
The main workout comes next, and lastly they do a cool-down
consisting of more easy jogging.
The reason I place strides and drills in this context is that they do
an excellent job of preparing the body for fast running—especially
after you prepare your body for strides and drills with an easy jog.
Strides and drills elevate muscle temperature and release
appropriate hormones to a level that is conducive to efficient, fast
running. They also increase muscle and connective tissue elasticity
and active range of motion in the hips. Finally, drills and strides
“prime” the nervous system for fast running. Have you ever noticed
that when you run a set of intervals at the track, your first and
second intervals are never your best? That’s because the nervous
system must be primed for optimal performance.
In addition to serving as good warm-up tools, drills and strides
provide general neuromuscular-fitness benefits. Strides develop
neuromuscular coordination and efficiency at high speed. Drills
enhance dynamic flexibility, stride power, stride stiffness, and
efficiency. And one drill in particular, sideways skipping, reduces
injury risk by strengthening the important stabilizing muscles at the
inside and outside of the hips.
Do a set of drills and strides following the jogging portion of your
warm-up in any workout involving running at 10K pace or faster.
Start with one set (that is, do each drill and one stride one time) and
progress to two or three sets. Following are descriptions of how to do
strides and my recommended drills.
Slow Skipping
--- PAGE 127 ---
Drive your right knee upward hard. Allow the upward momentum
generated by this movement to lift your left foot off the ground and
take a small hop-step forward with that foot. Lower your right foot to
the ground one step ahead of the left and immediately drive the left
knee upward, taking a hop-step forward with the right foot. Continue
skipping forward for 30 meters, leaping as high as you can with each
skip. This drill increases stride power and stride stiffness.
High Knees
Run forward at a fast tempo but a slow rate of forward progress
and with exaggerated knee lift. Concentrate on keeping your spine
straight as you lift your thighs to a 90-degree angle to the ground.
Stay up on your toes when you make ground contact. Continue
moving forward for 30 meters. This drill increases dynamic flexibility
in the hips and stride stiffness at the ankles.
Butt Kicks
Run at a slow rate of forward progress while trying to keep your
thighs locked in line with your torso and touching the heel of your
foot to your butt with each stride. Continue for 30 meters. This drill
strengthens the hamstrings and increases dynamic flexibility in the
knee.
Sideways Jumping Jacks
Do a regular jumping jack, but when you push off the ground, push
a little harder with the right foot so you travel about a foot to the left
in midair. Continue skipping sideways to the left for 30 meters, then
reverse your direction and skip back to where you started. This drill
strengthens the hip abductors (on the outsides of the thighs) and the
hip adductors (on the insides of the thighs), enhancing the stability of
--- PAGE 128 ---
the hips, pelvis, and lower spine during running and thus increasing
efficiency and reducing injury risk.
Strides
Run 100 meters at approximately 1,500-meter race pace.
Concentrate on keeping your stride compact, relaxed, and powerful.
As mentioned above, strides help to develop neuromuscular
coordination and efficiency at high speed.
Muscle-Training Progressions for the 5K, 10K, Half-
Marathon, and Marathon
The optimal muscle-training progression is similar for all of the
standard road-race distances from 5K to the marathon. It is a type of
training that all road racers need to do regularly but that none needs
to do in large amounts. In this section, I’ll present 11 tables designed
to illustrate the specific type of muscle training that is appropriate at
various points throughout the training cycle for runners preparing for
peak races at the four popular road-race distances. The tables also
suggest how muscle training should be integrated into the overall
training schedule.
Within each table, muscle-training elements appear in boldface.
These elements are also described in greater detail than workouts
representing other types of training, which are not our concern in this
context.
Early Introductory Period—5K to Marathon
All runners, regardless of their race-distance focus, should
approach muscle training similarly in the introductory period, so
these first two tables—presenting representative weekly schedules
--- PAGE 129 ---
for the early and late introductory period—apply to runners preparing
for a peak race at any distance from 5K to the marathon.
Sunday Long Run
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (2 × 8 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Threshold Run
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (2 × 8 sec. on 8% grade)
Friday Fartlek Intervals
2-mile warm-up
2 miles moderate w/6 × 30 sec. @ 5K pace
2-mile cool-down
Saturday Off
Late Introductory Period—5K to Marathon
The introductory period is intended to be relatively short (three to
six weeks), so there isn’t a tremendous amount of progression that
can occur. Developing maximal specific strength and stride power is
a major muscle-training emphasis throughout the introductory period.
Since this type of training must be introduced gently, however, there
--- PAGE 130 ---
is significant progression in the volume of hill sprinting performed
between the beginning and the end of this period.
Sunday Long Run + Moderate Progression
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (8 × 8 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Threshold Run
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (8 × 8 sec. on 8% grade)
Friday Fartlek Intervals
2-mile warm-up
4 miles moderate w/10 × 45 sec. @ 5K pace
2-mile cool-down
Saturday Off
Early Fundamental Period—5K
Because 5K runners race at a pace that is close to the pace of
speed intervals, they need to take their own approach to the
speed/specific-endurance training progression in the fundamental
period. They should start with a focus on 3K-pace running to build
immediate speed support for their 5K goal pace, with an optional
--- PAGE 131 ---
lighter emphasis on hill repetitions, to help transform strength into
speed, as illustrated in Friday’s workout below. Hill sprint training
may be reduced from two sessions per week to one session.
Sunday Long Run + Moderate Progression
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (10 × 10 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Threshold Run
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Strides
Friday Speed Intervals ® Hill Repetitions
Strides and Drills
4 × 400m hills @ 3,000m pace w/2-min. jog recoveries
4 × 200m hills @ 1,500m pace w/2-min. jog recoveries
Saturday Off
Early Fundamental Period—10K and Half-Marathon
Runners preparing for 10K and half-marathon races should do
essentially the same sorts of muscle training in the foundation
period, as the same level of neuromuscular fitness support is needed
for success at both distances. (For the typical runner, 10K pace is
--- PAGE 132 ---
only 7 or 8 percent faster than half-marathon pace.) In this example
of early fundamental-period training below, Friday’s workout provides
a spectrum of training stimuli ranging from specific endurance (the 6-
minute interval is run at 10K pace) to extended speed (the final, 1-
minute interval is run at 1,500-meter pace after only a minute’s
recovery).
Sunday Long Run + Moderate Progression
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (10 × 10 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Threshold Run
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Strides
Friday Ladder Intervals
Strides and Drills
2 × (6 min., 5 min., 4 min., 3 min., 2 min., 1 min.)
Saturday Off
Early Fundamental Period—Marathon
Marathon runners don’t need to mess around much with speeds
exceeding 5K pace. Monday’s hill sprints suffice to maintain specific
--- PAGE 133 ---
strength and stride power, while Thursday’s and Friday’s strides
administer a very small but adequate dose of running at 1,500-meter
pace. Friday’s repetition-intervals workout qualifies as both speed
and specific-endurance training for the marathon runner at this
stage.
Sunday Long Run + Hard Progression
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints 10 × 10 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Threshold Run
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Strides
Friday Specific-Endurance/Speed Intervals
Strides and Drills
6 × 800m @ 5K pace w/90-sec. jog recoveries
Saturday Off
Late Fundamental Period—5K
By the end of the fundamental period, hard threshold running and
moderately hard specific-endurance workouts at goal pace have
become the top training priorities for the 5K runner. But speed
--- PAGE 134 ---
remains an important secondary priority, as evidenced by the set of
300-meter intervals at 1,500-meter pace following Tuesday’s
threshold workout.
Sunday Moderate Run + Threshold Run
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (10 × 10 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Threshold Run + Speed Intervals (4 × 300m @ 1,500m pace)
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Strides
Friday Specific-Endurance Intervals (at 5K goal pace)
Strides and Drills
Saturday Off
Late Fundamental Period—10K and Half-Marathon
Everything is just slightly different in this example of late-
fundamental-period training for 10K and half-marathon runners as
compared to the 5K example above. The longer-distance runners do
a different sort of long run on Sunday, most likely a somewhat
different threshold run on Tuesday, and a slower, longer specific-
endurance intervals session on Friday. And as for muscle training,
--- PAGE 135 ---
the short speed session following the threshold run on Tuesday also
features intervals that are a little slower and a little longer than those
done by the 5K runner.
Sunday Long Run + Hard Progression
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (10 × 10 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Threshold Run + Speed Intervals (3 × 400m @ 3K pace)
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Strides
Friday Specific-Endurance Intervals (at 10K goal pace)
Strides and Drills
8 × 1K @ 10K pace
Saturday Off
Late Fundamental Period—Marathon
Speed was a relatively low priority for the marathon runner in the
early fundamental period and it remains so in the late fundamental
period. While all marathon runners should be open to tackling a solid
stint of speed training as necessary at this point in the training cycle,
--- PAGE 136 ---
this more typical example includes just one add-on speed interval at
5K to 3K pace in Friday’s specific-endurance workout.
Sunday Easy/Moderate/Hard Progression
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (10× 10 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Threshold Progression
15 min. @ marathon pace
10–15 min. @ half-marathon pace
10–15 min. @ 10K pace
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Strides
Friday Specific-Endurance Intervals + Add-On Speed Interval
Strides and Drills
4 × 2K @ 10K pace + 1K @ 5K–3K pace
Saturday Off
Sharpening Period—5K
In the short (four-to six-week) sharpening period as much running
as possible should be concentrated close to goal race pace.
However, the ability to run efficiently at slightly faster speeds is
crucial to provide neuromuscular-fitness support for peak 5K
--- PAGE 137 ---
performance, so a block of 1,500-meter-pace running is included in
Tuesday’s specific-endurance workout.
Sunday Moderate Run + Threshold Run
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (10 × 10 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Specific-Endurance + Speed Intervals
Strides and Drills
4 × 1K @ 5K pace
4 × 400m @ 1,500m pace w/3-min. jog recoveries
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Strides
Friday Specific-Endurance Intervals (at 5K goal pace)
Strides and Drills
Saturday Off
Sharpening Period—10K and Half-Marathon
Power efficiency and fatigue resistance at goal pace are by far the
most important fitness concerns in the sharpening period for 10K
and half-marathon runners. The ability to resist anaerobic fatigue
factors associated with faster speeds is a small aspect of
neuromuscular support for 10K and half-marathon race performance.
--- PAGE 138 ---
Therefore, the sample week below includes a lot of running at half-
marathon and 10K pace and only strides and a single 1K add-on
interval to provide a speed stimulus.
Sunday Easy/Moderate/Hard Progression
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (10 × 10 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Threshold Run
10–15 min. @ marathon pace
10–15 min. @ half-marathon pace
10–15 min. @ half-marathon/10K pace
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Strides
Friday Specific-Endurance Intervals + Add-On Speed Interval
Strides and Drills
4 × 2K @ 10K pace + 1K @ 5K–3K pace
Saturday Off
Sharpening Period—Marathon
For marathon runners, efforts at 5K to 1,500-meter pace can more
or less disappear in the sharpening period, as they do in this
example, save for Thursday’s strides.
--- PAGE 139 ---
Sunday Marathon-Pace Run
Monday Easy Run + Hill Sprints (10 × 10 sec. on 8% grade)
Tuesday Specific-Endurance Intervals
4 × 3K @ half-marathon pace
Wednesday Easy Run + Moderate Progression
Thursday Easy Run + Strides
Friday Cruise Intervals
2 × 4 miles @ marathon pace
Saturday Off
--- PAGE 140 ---
Shayne Culpepper © Alison Wade
Runner Profile: Shayne Culpepper
A few years ago, one of America’s top female distance runners,
Shayne Culpepper, took a year off to have a baby. When she
returned to running, she decided to find a new coach. Shayne
wanted more than just to return to the level she’d been at before her
pregnancy—she wanted to become even better. And she was smart
enough to know she would have to change her training in one or
more ways to reach the next level.
Shayne allowed me to look over four years of her training logs and
offer feedback. I came away from my analysis of her training logs
with some definite ideas about what she needed to do differently in
her training. She liked my ideas and decided to work with me.
--- PAGE 141 ---
Shayne had eight years of consistent training under her belt, which
was great. But I noticed that too much of her training was at the
extremes. She had done a lot of moderate aerobic training and a lot
of short, fast stuff on the track, but not much in between. As a result,
she was aerobically strong and had excellent speed, but she lacked
the specific endurance she needed to succeed at her primary event
distance of 5,000 meters. She could run 15 miles at six-minutes-per-
mile pace, but struggled to run five miles at 5:30 pace.
Her goal was to qualify for the 2004 Athens Olympics at 5,000
meters. The qualifying standard was 15:08, and her best time then
was 15:23. So she needed to make a fairly big step forward. To
complicate matters, she didn’t want to go to Europe to qualify for the
Olympic Trials in the summer track meets, so we knew she had to
qualify in May in the United States. We only had five months, so
there was really no time to create a long, periodized program.
Fortunately, because she was 30 years old and had trained
consistently for so long, Shayne did not require a lot of base work,
which allowed us to get specific very quickly. After six weeks of
introductory training, we went right to specific endurance. I brought in
the stuff she was missing from day one: longer intervals (repeats
ranging from 800 meters to 2K) and intensive threshold training.
We did two hard workouts each week. On one of her hard days I
would give her 5K-specific stuff or a mix 5K-specific and 1,500-
meter-specific stuff, alternating between the two formats from week
to week. (The 1,500 was Shayne’s secondary event.) On the other
hard day she did threshold work. I had her run at half-marathon pace
one week (for example, 2 times 15 minutes or 30 minutes straight at
half-marathon pace) and at 10K pace the next week (2K’s or 3K’s at
10K race pace).
Shayne responded very well to this program. She won an IAAF
World Indoor Track and Field Championships bronze medal after
only two and a half months on the adaptive running system. In late
--- PAGE 142 ---
May she blew away the Olympic qualifying standard for 5,000
meters, running 15:01. In July she won the Olympic Trials 5,000
meters, and she was able to live her dream of competing in the
Athens Olympics.
--- PAGE 143 ---
Specific-Endurance Training 5
         
In the sport of distance running, it is not speed that limits us. It’s
endurance. The average competitive runner is capable of running
world-record 5,000-meter pace. Sure, you might not be able to
sustain that pace for more than 100 meters or so, but in the strictest
sense it is not a lack of speed that prevents you from breaking the
world record for 5,000 meters but a lack of fatigue resistance at the
required speed.
When we think of endurance, we generally think of the capacity to
cover vast distances and to keep moving for long spans of time. But
in fact, endurance is the ability to resist fatigue at any level of
exercise intensity, including maximal intensity. Both the 100-meter
sprint and the 200-meter sprint are maximal-intensity running events,
yet some sprinters who excel at 100 meters do not fare as well at
200 meters because they are unable to sustain maximal intensity as
well as other sprinters who excel at both distances.
In short, every runner needs to have some measure of endurance
—even those whose races last only 10 or 20 seconds. To be more
precise, every runner needs to develop a level of endurance that
--- PAGE 144 ---
enables him or her to sustain the highest possible percentage of
maximal running speed over the full race distance. Thus, endurance
is specific to each race distance. At the (male) world-class level, a
100-meter sprint specialist must be able to sustain 100 percent of his
maximum sprint speed for 10 seconds. A 5,000-meter runner must
be able to sustain nearly 60 percent of his maximum running speed
for 13 minutes. And a marathon runner must be able to sustain
roughly 40 percent of his maximum sprint speed for two hours and
10 minutes.
I use the term “specific endurance” to denote the type of
endurance that is needed to maximize performance at a particular
race distance. It is the ability to resist fatigue at your goal pace for a
particular race distance long enough to reach the finish line without
slowing down.
To achieve your race time goals, you must first attain the requisite
level of specific endurance in your training. Whether or not you
actually achieve your race goal times depends on other factors, as
well, such as good pacing, mental toughness, and favorable weather
and course conditions. But without the requisite level of specific
endurance, none of these other factors matter. Achieving specific
endurance for a peak race requires that you build an appropriate
foundation of aerobic support and neuromuscular fitness and then
mix these two ingredients together in the proper ratio. All of the
training you do throughout the entire training cycle, beginning with
the very first workout, should be oriented toward the goal of
achieving specific endurance for your next peak race. In other words,
every workout should have a specific-endurance rationale.
This does not mean every workout should be performed at or near
your goal race pace. Slow recovery runs, maximal-effort hill sprints,
and many other kinds of workouts that do not closely approximate
the demands of racing have their place in the process of developing
the capacity to meet the specific demands of racing. But what you
must avoid is the common mistake of losing sight of how a particular
--- PAGE 145 ---
type of training will contribute to the development of specific
endurance and consequently doing too much or too little of it. For
example, some runners unconsciously substitute the goal of
improving their VO2max for the goal of achieving specific endurance
and therefore do too much VO2max training (such as three-minute
intervals). While VO2max is closely associated with race
performance, it is not a stand-in for race performance. Thus, by
overemphasizing VO2max training, you might fail to develop other
fitness qualities that are also needed to achieve specific endurance
and as a result fail to achieve your race time goal despite attaining a
higher VO2max.
Specific-Endurance Workouts
I draw a distinction between workouts that function to develop
either the aerobic-support foundation or the neuromuscular-fitness
foundation for specific endurance and workouts whose purpose is to
develop specific endurance on top of the combined foundation of
aerobic support and neuromuscular fitness. Specific-endurance
workouts are workouts that aim to increase efficiency and/or fatigue
resistance at or near the runner’s goal race pace for a specific race
distance. To qualify as a specific-endurance session, the workout
must emphasize running efforts within a pace range between 10
percent slower and 10 percent faster than goal race pace. Workouts
performed outside this pace range, while beneficial, are not close
enough to race pace to stimulate the specific physiological
adaptations that will maximize efficiency and fatigue resistance at
race pace.
Let’s say your peak-race goal is to break 37 minutes for 10K.
Therefore your goal race pace is 5:58 per mile. A pace of 6:34 per
mile is 10 percent slower than this goal race pace; a pace of 5:22 per
mile is 10 percent faster. So your specific-endurance workout pace
--- PAGE 146 ---
range, if your goal is to run a sub-37:00 10K, would be 6:34 to 5:22
per mile.
The closer you get to your peak race, the more your specific-
endurance pace range should narrow. During the introductory and
fundamental periods of training, I like to use the full 10-percent-
slower-to-10-percent-faster range. In the late fundamental period
and sharpening period, I narrow the range down to 3 or 4 percent
above and below goal race pace. Maximizing time spent running
very near your goal pace in the final weeks of training will maximize
your efficiency and fatigue resistance at that pace.
Depending on the distance of your peak race, some workouts may
serve as both specific-endurance and speed-interval workouts, or as
both specific-endurance and threshold workouts. For example, a 5K
runner who performs a set of intervals at 3K pace is really doing both
a speed-interval workout and a specific-endurance workout, as 3K
pace is only 4 to 5 percent faster than 5K race pace for most
runners. Similarly, a threshold workout at half-marathon pace also
counts as specific-endurance training for a runner preparing for a
peak race at the half-marathon distance.
Because the adaptive running system aims to develop runners
with well-rounded fitness, I advise all runners to perform a certain
amount of training at every pace level between an easy jog and a full
sprint, regardless of the distance of their peak race. Runners training
for a 5K peak race should do some marathon-pace running, runners
training for a marathon should do some 5K-pace running, and so
forth. Thus, different runners may use the same workout in different
ways, and a workout that serves primarily as a specific-endurance
workout for one runner will serve a different purpose for another
runner. For example, a 10K runner might run 4 × 2K at 10K pace
with 1-minute active recoveries as a specific-endurance workout in
the late fundamental period or sharpening period. A 5K runner might
do the same workout with slightly longer active recoveries as an
aerobic-support workout.
--- PAGE 147 ---
As explained in previous chapters, aerobic-support workouts
become more and more specific throughout the training cycle,
primarily by emphasizing faster and faster pace levels. At the same
time, muscle-training workouts, and in particular speed-interval
workouts, become more and more race-specific throughout the
training cycle by emphasizing longer, slower (but still fast) efforts and
by becoming more integrated with specific-endurance training.
Meanwhile, specific-endurance training progresses throughout the
training cycle by emphasizing progressively longer efforts at goal
pace and by reducing the duration of recovery periods between goal-
pace intervals. Thus, in the sharpening period of training—the final
few weeks before your peak race—there is a convergence in these
three separate threads of your training, such that your three hardest
workouts of the week emphasize efforts at or relatively near race
pace.
Specific-endurance training culminates in a single workout that
constitutes your most race-specific workout, which is performed 15
to 10 days before your peak race. This workout puts the finishing
touches on your development of specific endurance and
demonstrates your ability to achieve your peak-race goal time
(provided you are able to sustain the appropriate pace throughout
the workout). Table 5.1 presents suggested peak-level specific-
endurance workouts for three categories of runners at the four
popular road-race distances.
For 5K and 10K runners, these workouts should be more or less
the same for runners of all ability levels, because the distances are
relatively short, so that a low-key competitive runner can handle a
highly race-specific 5K or 10K workout as well as a highly
competitive runner can. (What makes the highly trained runner’s
version of the workout harder, in absolute terms, is that it is most
likely run at a faster pace.) But at the longer distances—half-
marathon and marathon—the formats representing the most
appropriate peak-level specific-endurance workouts begin to diverge
for runners at different training levels. For less-competitive runners,
--- PAGE 148 ---
merely covering these longer distances is a much greater challenge
than it is for highly competitive runners, for whom it is the speed they
wish to sustain over that distance that represents the greater
challenge.
For example, for a low-key competitive marathon runner, there is
little or no difference between “just finish” pace for the marathon and
race pace. But a highly competitive marathon runner might be able
to easily “jog” a marathon at a pace that’s one or two minutes per
mile slower than his or her goal race pace for the event. Thus, the
best peak-level specific-endurance workout for a low-key competitive
runner is an easy run of 20 to 22 miles, whereas for a highly
competitive runner it might be somewhat shorter, but far more
aggressive pace-wise.
The following table presents suggested peak-level specific-
endurance workouts for three categories of runners at the four
popular road-race distances.
Table 5.1 Suggested Peak-Level Specific-Endurance Workouts
Category of Runner
Peak-
Race
Distance
Low-Key
Competitive
Competitive Highly Competitive
5K 5 × 1K @ goal
pace w/2-min. jog
recoveries
5 × 1K @ goal pace
w/90-sec. jog
recoveries
5 × 1K @ 5K pace
w/1-min. jog
recoveries
10K 4 × 2K @ 10K
pace w/1-min. jog
4 × 2K @ 10K pace +
1K @ maximum effort
4 × 2K @ 10K pace +
1K @ maximum effort
--- PAGE 149 ---
recoveries w/1-min. jog
recoveries
w/1-min. jog
recoveries
Half-
Marathon
6 × 1 mile @ half-
marathon pace
w/2-min. jog
recoveries
4 × 3K @ half-
marathon pace w/90-
sec. jog recoveries
3 × 5K @ half-
marathon pace w/90-
sec. jog recoveries
Marathon 20–22 miles easy 10 miles easy
10 miles @ marathon
pace
45 min. easy + 20K:
1K on/1K off
On = marathon goal
pace
Off = marathon pace +
5–10 sec./mile
Progression of Specific-Endurance Training
Specific-endurance workouts performed in the early part of the
training cycle are necessarily different from the peak-level workouts
shown in Table 5.1, which are almost as challenging as the peak
race itself, because they require that the runner cover the full race
distance or something close to it at race pace with minimal recovery
opportunity, so that the runner must be already near his or her peak
fitness level to complete them. When you introduce specific-
endurance training in the introductory period, it should take the form
of short, approximate efforts whose purpose is mainly to get your
body accustomed to the feel of race pace. For 5K, 10K, and half-
marathon runners, these efforts will most likely take the form of
fartlek intervals. Marathon runners will start with a short (perhaps 10-
minute) marathon-pace progression at the end of a long run.
From this point, specific-endurance training will progress toward
peak level in four ways. First, specific-endurance efforts will move
--- PAGE 150 ---
closer to your exact goal pace. For example, a 10K runner might do
his first session of specific-endurance intervals at his current
estimated 10K pace and later move up to his goal 10K pace.
Second, the amount of specific-endurance running performed in a
single workout will increase. For example, a half-marathon runner
might advance from a workout comprising a 70-minute easy run plus
a 10-minute hard progression (at roughly half-marathon pace) to a
threshold run featuring 2 × 15 minutes @ half-marathon pace with a
2-minute active recovery (i.e., jogging) between threshold efforts.
(The lion’s share of specific-endurance training for half-marathon
runners should occur within the context of threshold runs in the
fundamental and sharpening periods.)
Third, race-pace efforts will become more extended. For example,
a 10K runner might move from 1K intervals at 10K pace to 2K
intervals at 10K pace. And lastly, the recovery opportunities between
race-pace efforts will be shortened or, in the case of some marathon-
specific workouts, performed at a faster pace. For example, a
marathon runner might advance from (a) a workout including 10 ×
1K “on”/1K “off,” in which the “on” segments are run 10 seconds per
mile faster than goal marathon pace and the “off” segments are run
one minute per mile slower than marathon pace to (b) one in which
the “on” segments are run at goal marathon pace and the “off”
segments are run just 30 seconds per mile slower.
These four patterns of progression for specific-endurance training
may be used in any order from workout to workout and even
simultaneously, as long as the overall challenge level does not
increase too quickly from one session to the next. For example, a 5K
runner might run 6 × 600 meters at her current 5K pace with 2-
minute active recoveries in one specific-endurance workout, and in
the next one run 5 × 800 meters at her goal 5K pace with 90-second
active recoveries. In this example, the total amount of race-pace
running, the duration of race-pace efforts, and the actual pace of the
efforts have all increased slightly, while the recovery opportunities
have been reduced.
--- PAGE 151 ---
Another sort of progression pattern that is often manifest in my
application of specific-endurance training is a movement from
workouts that integrate specific-endurance training with other types
of training (anaerobic hill repetitions, speed intervals, threshold
progressions) to workouts that focus squarely on race-pace training.
For example, a 5K runner might advance from a 2 × (6-minute, 5-
minute, 4-minute, 3-minute, 2-minute, 1-minute) ladder interval
workout, in which intervals are run between 10K pace and 1,500-
meter pace, to a workout comprising 5 × 800 meters at 5K to 3K
pace. While I do, in fact, use multi-pace workouts that include race-
pace running throughout the training cycle, because they are an
effective means of administering small doses of lower-priority
training intensities, my reliance on them decreases as the training
cycle unfolds. The ladder workout example I just cited might be a
runner’s primary specific-endurance workout in a training week
occurring in the early fundamental period, whereas it might be used
to provide a second dose of specific-endurance training plus a little
speed work in the sharpening period, perhaps three days after an
exclusively race-pace interval session.
It’s not important that your specific-endurance workout
progressions be totally systematic. What’s important is that your first
bit of specific-endurance training be appropriate to your current
fitness level, that your subsequent specific-endurance workouts
become a little more race-specific from session to session, and that
your peak-level specific-endurance workout be challenging and
specific enough to all but ensure that you achieve your peak-race
time goal, provided you complete the workout at the required level.
But it’s okay to be somewhat creative and spontaneous in
developing each particular specific-endurance workout format as you
go.
Let’s now look at some examples of specific-endurance workout
progressions for each of the four popular road-race distances. These
examples are not intended to be used as actual training plans to be
followed exactly as they are written. Rather, they are intended simply
--- PAGE 152 ---
to provide concrete examples of how specific-endurance training
should evolve over the course of a training cycle. The 12-workout
sequence for each distance does not represent an exhaustive list of
every specific-endurance workout you might do in a given training
cycle; it is only a selection of benchmarks or stepping-stones that
you might hit en route to a peak race, along with other specific-
endurance workouts that are not listed but whose design might be
inferred by imagining a session that represents a halfway point
between any two sequential workouts on the list. This is especially
true for the marathon plan. While 12 specific-endurance workouts
might be sufficient to prepare a runner with a decent base-fitness
level for a peak-level 5K performance, a marathon runner would
almost certainly require more.
These tables also should not be taken to imply that one must
always do one specific-endurance workout per week every week
throughout the training cycle. While it’s best to do some race-pace
running each week, your major specific-endurance sessions may be
spread out by as much as 10 days in the foundation period. The
sample adaptive training plans in Chapter 12 will give you a more
complete picture of appropriate specific-endurance workout
progressions in the total training context.
Finally, most of the workouts laid out in the following tables are
appropriate only for runners at a certain level of fitness and training.
In creating these sample progressions, I had in mind hypothetical
runners averaging 35 to 45 miles per week for 5K, 40 to 50 miles per
week for 10K, 50 to 60 miles per week for the half-marathon, and 55
to 65 miles per week for the marathon.
--- PAGE 153 ---
A good coach monitors his runners to make sure their fitness is
moving in the direction of race-specificity. As a self-coached
runner you must do the same for yourself. © Alison Wade
Specific-Endurance Training for 5K
Specific-endurance training for the 5K is fairly straightforward,
because every 5K runner should aim toward the same peak-level 5K
specific-endurance workout: 5 × 1K @ 5K goal pace with 1-minute
jog recoveries. All of the preceding specific-endurance workouts in
the training cycle should be structured and arranged to ensure that
you are able to complete the peak-level workout at your goal pace.
Start your 5K specific-endurance training with fartlek intervals in
the 10K-to 3K-pace range in the introductory period. It’s best to do
one such workout per week, because it delivers a manageable dose,
and most likely your only dose, of race-pace running at this stage.
--- PAGE 154 ---
Progress by adding intervals, increasing the duration of intervals,
and increasing the overall duration of the workout.
As fartlek interval workouts are phased out in the transition from
the introductory period to the fundamental period, hill repetitions,
speed intervals, and race-pace intervals are phased in. Hill
repetitions prepare 5K runners to better handle the stress of
challenging speed and race-pace interval sessions by building
strength along with speed and specific endurance. Therefore I
recommend that you do at least one hill-repetition workout before
taking on your first challenging speed and/or race-pace interval
workout. But you don’t have to delay your first such workout until
after you’ve completed a “block” of hill repetition sessions, as this
table may seem to suggest. Just avoid doing your first very hard
speed and/or race-pace interval session until after you have a couple
of hill-repetition sessions in your legs.
I keep saying “speed and/or race-pace” because in the early
fundamental period your specific-endurance workouts should
emphasize efforts at 5K to 1,500-meter pace, a range in which 5K
specific endurance blends with speed. The objective of your specific-
endurance workout progression in this period is to gradually extend
your speed by increasing the distance of the intervals you run at race
pace and faster.
By the late fundamental period, your specific-endurance workouts
should focus squarely on your goal 5K pace. Take your specific
endurance to peak level by continuing to increase your interval
distance to an upper limit of 1K and then cutting the jogging recovery
periods between intervals down to one minute.
Fartlek Intervals
8 × 30 sec. @ 10K–3K pace
--- PAGE 155 ---
Fartlek Intervals
8 × 40 sec. @ 10K–3K pace
8 × 300m hills @ current 3K pace
w/2-min. jog recoveries
8 × 400m hills @ goal 5K pace
w/2-min. jog recoveries
Ladder Intervals
2 × (6 min., 5 min., 4 min., 3 min., 2 min., 1 min.) @ 10K–1,500m pace
w/90-sec. jog recoveries between intervals, 2-min. walk recovery between
sets
10 × 400m @ current 5K–3K pace
w/2-min. jog recoveries
12 × 400m @ current 5K–3K pace
w/2-min. jog recoveries
7 × 600m @ current 5K pace
w/2-min. jog recoveries
5 × 800 @ goal 5K pace
w/90-sec. jog recoveries
6 × 800 @ goal 5K pace
w/90-sec. jog recoveries
5 × 1K @ goal 5K pace
w/90-sec. jog recoveries
--- PAGE 156 ---
5 × 1K @ goal 5K pace
w/1-min. jog recoveries
Specific-Endurance Training for 10K
Most competitive runners are capable of performing the same
peak-level 10K specific-endurance workout, which, like the 5K peak-
level specific-endurance workout, should be performed roughly 10
days before your peak race. My preferred format is 4 × 2K @ 10K
goal pace with 1-minute jog recoveries plus 1K @ maximal effort.
This session is actually a little tougher than the slightly more race-
specific alternative: 5 × 2K @ 10K goal pace. The first format tells
me a little more about the athlete’s race readiness, too, because the
maximal-effort 1K finish shows exactly how much fuel is left in the
tank after 8K of running at 10K goal pace.
The specific-endurance training that precedes either one of these
peak-level workouts must gradually prepare you to complete it
successfully. As with the 5K, the progression starts with fartlek
intervals in the introductory period. These may be more numerous
and slightly slower than they are for a 5K runner, to make the
workout a little more 10K-specific, but it doesn’t matter much.
You have the option to perform one or more hill-repetition workouts
at the beginning of the fundamental period to build more specific
strength before you take on your first hard specific-endurance
interval workout at the track. If you choose to do some hill
repetitions, they may be a little longer and slower than they are for a
5K runner.
The remainder of the fundamental period is devoted to extending
your 10K speed. Begin with short intervals at 5K pace and then
gradually increase the length of your specific efforts and slow the
--- PAGE 157 ---
pace, stopping at 10K goal pace in the late fundamental period.
Once you are running close to 10K in total distance at 10K goal pace
in your specific-endurance workouts, shorten the active recoveries to
1 minute.
Fartlek Intervals
10 × 30 sec. @ 10K–3K pace
Fartlek Intervals
10 × 40 sec. @ 10K–3K pace
Fartlek Intervals
10 × 50 sec. @ 10K–3K pace
8 × 400m hills @ current 5K pace
w/2-min. jog recoveries
8 × 600m hills @ current 5K pace
w/2-min. jog recoveries
8 × 800m @ current 10K–5K
pace w/2-min. jog recoveries
8 × 1K @ current 10K pace
w/2-min. jog recoveries
8 × 1K @ goal 10K pace
w/90-sec. jog recoveries
6 × 1 mile @ goal 10K pace
--- PAGE 158 ---
w/90-sec. jog recoveries
5 × 2K @ goal 10K pace
w/90-sec. jog recoveries
4 × 2K @ goal 10K pace + 1K max effort
w/1-min. jog recoveries
Specific-Endurance Training for the Half-Marathon
The half-marathon is similar to the 10K in one way, but different in
another. On the one hand, most competitive runners are able to run
a half-marathon at a pace that’s only 15 to 20 seconds per mile
slower than their 10K race pace. On the other hand, the half-
marathon is more than twice the distance of the 10K and presents a
significantly greater endurance challenge.
Due to its unique nature, the half-marathon demands a different
approach to specific-endurance training than shorter races.
Specifically, when training for a half-marathon peak race, you should
distribute your specific-endurance training stimuli among three
separate types of workouts: specific-endurance interval sessions,
threshold workouts, and long runs. While 5K and 10K runners
perform threshold workouts and long runs as well, half-marathon
runners must rely on these workouts more heavily to develop their
specific endurance, whereas for 5K and 10K runners these slower
workouts serve almost entirely to develop aerobic support.
Half-marathon runners should approach specific-endurance
intervals in more or less the same way as 10K runners. The only
difference is that their last few specific-endurance interval workouts
should focus on half-marathon goal pace and should include more
--- PAGE 159 ---
total goal-pace running. Threshold runs should include efforts at
marathon pace (or slightly faster), half-marathon pace, and between
half-marathon pace and 10K pace, with the total amount of threshold
running in each session and especially the amount of half-marathon-
pace running gradually increasing. In the sharpening period, specific-
endurance workouts and threshold workouts are almost
indistinguishable for the half-marathon runner.
Long runs, meanwhile, must first establish the basic endurance
needed to easily cover the half-marathon distance and then develop
the capacity to cover this distance at faster and faster speeds. For
the low-mileage runner, long runs are really the primary specific-
endurance workout, because at the start of the training cycle such a
runner might not be able to run 13.1 miles at any pace.
The following table shows only the specific-endurance intervals
progression. It is fairly challenging and is appropriate only for
runners who are capable of at least jogging 13.1 miles at the
beginning of the training cycle and who are willing and able to train
at least 45 miles per week, on average.
Fartlek Intervals
10 × 40 sec. @ 10K–3K pace
Fartlek Intervals
10 × 50 sec. @ 10K–3K pace
1 hour easy + 4 × 600m uphill @ 5K–3K pace
6 × 800m @ current 5K–3K pace
w/2-min. jog recoveries
--- PAGE 160 ---
5 × 1K @ 5K pace
w/2-min. jog recoveries
Ladder Intervals
2 × (3K @ half-marathon pace, 2K @ current 10K pace, 1K @ current 5K
pace w/2-min. jog recoveries)
6 × 1 mile @ current 10K pace
4 × 2K @ goal 10K pace + 1K max effort
w/90-sec. jog recoveries
8 × 1 mile @ goal half-marathon pace
w/90-sec. jog recoveries
4 × 3K @ goal half-marathon pace
w/90-sec. jog recoveries
3 × 5K @ goal half-marathon pace
w/90-sec. jog recoveries
Specific-Endurance Training for the Marathon
Everything is different when it comes to the marathon, and
specific-endurance training is no exception. In the adaptive running
system, specific-endurance training for the marathon occurs
primarily within the context of long runs. Because the endurance
challenge of the marathon is so great, the first priority of your long
runs is to develop the endurance required to cover the full marathon
distance comfortably. The next priority is to gradually increase the
--- PAGE 161 ---
pace you can sustain over that distance, up to your goal marathon
race pace.
If your marathon goal is not just to finish but to achieve a certain
finishing time, begin doing a small amount of goal-marathon-pace
running in your Sunday long runs in the very first weeks of the
training cycle. A 10-minute marathon-pace progression at the end of
an otherwise easy long run of manageable duration will serve to
begin the process of developing efficiency at the pace you will have
to sustain for 26.2 miles a few months down the road. From this
starting point, gradually increase the duration of your long runs, the
average pace of your long runs, and the amount of goal-pace
running you do within them. You may alternate back and forth
between workouts that emphasize distance covered, with less faster
running, and long runs that emphasize the amount of faster running
you do, with less total distance covered.
The best format for specific-endurance long runs in the late
fundamental period and sharpening period is a very long “warm-up”
of 45 minutes to an hour followed by repeated on/ off cycles of faster
and slower running. In your first such workout, run the “on” segments
faster than marathon goal pace and the “off” segments quite a bit
slower. Progress by slightly slowing down the pace of the “on”
segments and significantly increasing the pace of the “off” segments.
Your peak-level specific-endurance workout must be both very
long and quite heavy on race-pace running, covering at least 18
miles in total distance and including at least 10 miles at goal pace.
You should also do at least one long run whose total duration is
equal to your marathon goal time (unless your goal is just to finish, in
which case you should try to do at least one 20-mile run).
As a supplement to the specific-endurance training you
accomplish within the context of long runs, you can also do some
long threshold runs, usually scheduled for Tuesday or Friday, which
focus on extending marathon speed and slightly faster pace levels
--- PAGE 162 ---
over longer and longer distances. The following table incorporates a
few such workouts, which you can identify by their inclusion of some
running at half-marathon pace.
1-hour easy run + 10 min. uphill @ goal marathon pace
30 min. easy
10 min. @ goal marathon pace
1 min. easy
10 min. @ current half-marathon pace
1 min. easy
10 min. @ current half-marathon/10K pace
90 min. easy + 20 min. @ goal marathon pace
30 min. easy
15 min. @ current half-marathon pace
3 min. easy
15 min. @ current half-marathon pace
10 min. easy
2 hours easy + 20 min. @ goal marathon pace
30 min. easy
15 min. @ goal marathon pace
1 min. easy
15 min. @ current half-marathon pace
1 min. easy
10 min. @ current half-marathon/10K pace
5 min. easy
10K easy + 10 × 1 min. on/1 min. off
--- PAGE 163 ---
On = goal marathon pace-10 sec./mile
Off = goal marathon pace + 1 min./mile
2 hours easy
20 min. @ marathon pace + 20 sec./mile
20 min. @ goal marathon pace
10K easy + 10 × 1K on/1K off
On = goal marathon pace-5 sec. per mile
Off = goal marathon pace + 45 sec./mile
1 hour easy + 5 × 2K on/1K off
On = goal marathon pace
Off = goal marathon pace + 30 sec./mile
1 hour easy + 4 × 3K on/1K off
On = goal marathon pace
Off = goal marathon pace + 15 sec./mile
Specific-Endurance Tests
A specific-endurance test or “spec test” is a workout designed to
assess how close your current fitness level is to the level it will need
to reach if you’re going to achieve your goal race time. As I have
mentioned already, developing race-specific endurance is the whole
point of training. Every workout you do should move you toward this
objective in some way. But it’s not always easy to tell whether your
race-specific fitness is improving. That’s where spec tests come in.
There’s a difference between improving your performance in
whichever sorts of workouts you might be emphasizing in a particular
phase of training and improving your specific endurance. For
--- PAGE 164 ---
example, suppose you’re training for a 5K. You’ve run a set of very
fast 400m speed intervals with long recoveries each of the past three
Tuesdays, and your split times have improved markedly. This is a
sure sign that you’re getting fitter, right? Not exactly. The only thing
you know for sure is that you’re getting better at running that
workout. Without those recovery periods, you might find that you
fatigue very quickly, even at a slower pace. I’ve seen this sort of
thing happen many times.
There are only two ways to be certain that your specific endurance
is improving. The first is to run a race. But this option is only practical
for 5K and 10K runners, who can race at these distances every few
weeks without overtaxing their bodies. A second option—and really
the only option for half-marathon and marathon runners—is to
perform a very race-specific workout.
A good spec test for the 5K is the same workout you will use as
your peak-level specific-endurance workout: 5 × 1K @ 5K pace. The
only difference is that the recovery periods are longer—2 minutes
instead of 1 minute. Try to sustain your goal race pace throughout all
five intervals—how close you come to doing so, or how easily you
are able to do so, will reveal the current state of your specific
endurance for the 5K.
I’m not going to give you some magical formula that will tell you
exactly what your split times for this workout should be in relation to
your goal pace at various points in the training cycle. Your gut will tell
you. Just do the workout, look at your split times, compare them to
your goal pace, and consider how much training you have left to do
before your goal race, and you’ll have a feeling for whether your
training is on track.
Do the spec test (or run a 5K tune-up race, if you prefer) every five
or six weeks. Naturally, you will want to see a certain amount of
improvement each time you repeat it. When your level of
--- PAGE 165 ---
improvement is disappointing, you know it’s time to make a change
in your training. I’ll discuss how to make such changes in chapter 8.
My preferred spec test for the 10K is also identical to the peak-
level 10K specific-endurance workout, save for longer rest periods.
Run 4 × 2K @ 10K goal pace + 1K @ maximal effort with 3-minute
jog recoveries (instead of 1-minute jog recoveries). As with the 5K
spec test, do this 10K test (or run a 10K tune-up race) once every
five or six weeks to see how close your fitness level is to your
desired peak level.
The half-marathon requires a different sort of diagnostic test.
There are two options, actually. The first is what I usually call an
aerobic test, and it requires a heart-rate monitor. Step one is to come
up with a ballpark estimate of your current half-marathon race pace
in the context of doing your normal workouts involving efforts at your
current half-marathon race pace. Wear a heart-rate monitor during
these workouts and note the heart rate that is associated with your
current half-marathon race pace. This is your half-marathon heart
rate, which will not change much between now and your goal race.
What will change is the pace you can sustain at this heart rate. You’ll
have achieved peak-race fitness if and when your half-marathon
heart rate and your goal half-marathon pace match up.
Now you’re ready for your aerobic spec test. Go to the local track
and, after a thorough warm-up, run for 20 to 30 minutes at your half-
marathon heart rate. Stop after the designated test duration has
elapsed and note how far you’ve run. Use the time and distance data
to calculate your pace. Repeat this test once every five or six weeks.
You should move closer to your goal half-marathon pace each time.
If you don’t use a heart-rate monitor, you can perform a somewhat
more objective alternative half-marathon spec test. Go to the local
track, warm up thoroughly, and start the test. Instead of using heart
rate to set your pace at your current half-marathon level, use
perceived effort—that is, simply run at the fastest pace you feel you
--- PAGE 166 ---
could sustain through an entire half-marathon. Run exactly 4 miles
(16 laps + 40 yards) at this effort level. Don’t take any split times, as
doing so might affect your pacing. Stop at 4 miles and use your time
to calculate your pace. Repeat this test once every five or six weeks.
You should move closer to your goal half-marathon pace each time.
There is really no way to perform an effective specific-endurance
test for the marathon. Performance in the marathon is almost always
determined by what happens in the final 10K, after 20 miles of race-
pace running are completed. Either you hold pace or you fall apart.
Challenging marathon-pace workouts can give you a good sense of
your capacity to hold your goal marathon pace for 20 miles, but no
workout can tell you what will happen in the decisive closing 10K on
race day. The best you can do is look for consistent improvement as
you follow your specific-endurance workout progression throughout
the training cycle.

--- PAGE 167 ---
Ed Torres © Alison Wade
Runner Profile: Edwardo Torres
Edwardo Torres is the twin brother of Jorge Torres, whom I also
coach. Ed has often run in the shadow of Jorge, not so much
because Jorge is more talented as because Ed has struggled with
recurrent injuries (several stress fractures and bursitis in his hip) and
the doubts and frustration that his frequent breakdowns have
caused. When I started coaching him in 2005, Ed had never trained
at a high enough level for a long enough stretch of time to achieve
the sort of race performance he was capable of.
I helped Ed break free from his pattern of injury with my usual
methods. He had never done any true strength and power training
before I had him start doing hill sprints, which improved his strength
dramatically. I also increased his running mileage substantially.
Always a relatively low-mileage runner in the past, Ed initially had a
hard time believing me when I insisted that consistent high mileage
would reduce his risk of injury, provided we worked our way up the
volume ladder carefully. Thankfully, he decided to trust me, and he
has been able to run relatively injury-free for a while now.
In addition to working hard to increase Ed’s physical strength and
durability, I have also put a lot of effort into transforming his mind-set
about training. Ed’s disposition is such that he would rather do 70
miles a week of very hard running than 120 miles of mostly moderate
running with a few carefully chosen hard running opportunities. He
had to develop the attitude that running 120 to 130 miles per week
was no big deal, which is the attitude of most elite marathon runners.
Now that Ed has achieved this mind-set, I am confident he will soon
become one of the most successful marathon runners in the United
States.
--- PAGE 168 ---
Self-Assessment 6
         
In addition to coaching the members of the Performance Training
Group, I also advise runners periodically on a less formal basis.
Every now and again I receive a call or an e-mail message from a
friend of a friend who asks for my help in constructing a training plan.
While I really prefer to take an all-or-nothing approach to coaching
runners, I get such a kick out of building training plans that I don’t
mind fulfilling these requests if I feel that I can truly help the runner.
Before I create a training plan for any runner that I don’t know well
already, I ask for certain bits of information that I will need to make
sure the plan is a proper fit. My plans are always based on the
general adaptive running methods described in the previous five
chapters. But these general methods can be applied in countless
particular ways. The right way to apply them depends on the
individual’s background, strengths, weaknesses, and goals. So I
must gather some specific data in these areas before I can make a
good plan for any runner.
As a self-coached runner, you need to consider the same factors
in choosing or creating an adaptive training plan for yourself. This
--- PAGE 169 ---
means that you must complete a thorough self-assessment before
you start plunking workouts into a schedule. In this chapter, I’ll
discuss each of 10 individual factors that I consider in designing
training plans for runners and explain how to use each factor in your
running self-assessment and training-plan selection or design. These
10 factors are:
1. recent training
2. running experience
3. age
4. past race performances
5. short-term goal
6. injury history
7. event-specific strength and weakness
8. recovery profile
9. long-term goal
10. motivational profile
The order in which I’ve listed these 10 self-assessment factors is
not random. They are listed according to their relative weightiness in
affecting how you should train. All of the factors are important, but
your recent training (factor number 1) is the consideration that
should have the greatest influence on your training-program design.
--- PAGE 170 ---
Your individual motivational profile (factor number 10) should have a
much smaller influence.
The one ranking in this list that is somewhat forced is that of the
short-term goal. In a sense, your short-term goal should be your first
consideration, since your training will necessarily be completely
different if your short-term goal is to finish your first marathon than it
will be if your short-term goal is to set a new 5K personal record. But
since the first four factors—recent training, running experience, age,
and personal best times—are essential considerations in
establishing an appropriate short-term goal, I’ve listed the short-term
goal as the fifth factor. So, without further ado, let’s look at each
factor individually.
1. Recent Training
The training you’ve done over the past two years, and especially
within the past 12 months, is, for better or worse, the foundation for
the training you will do in your next training cycle. There are specific
possible inadequacies in your recent training that you should look for
and attempt to address in planning your next training cycle:
• Inadequate mileage
• Inadequate balance
• Inadequate specific-endurance training
More likely than not, you’ll need to run more miles than you’ve
done recently to improve as quickly as possible. But if you try to
drastically increase your running mileage, you’ll probably get injured.
So, if you’re ready and willing to train harder in your next training
--- PAGE 171 ---
cycle than you did in your previous one, plan to increase your
average and peak weekly training mileage by as much as, but no
more than, 50 percent, and ease into it.
In chapter 3, I presented a table that provides average weekly
training-mileage guidelines for five categories of runner preparing for
peak races at four distances. Refer back to this table when you
begin your self-assessment process. If your recent average weekly
running volume was lower than the recommended range for your
category and event, plan to bump it up into the optimal range. If
you’re ready to move up to the next category, then plan an average
weekly volume that falls within the optimal range for that category,
unless it’s more than 50 percent more than your recent weekly
volume, in which case you should increase your weekly running
volume by 50 percent.
Don’t feel obligated to increase your running mileage if you are
unable or unwilling to devote more time to training. There are other
ways to improve besides running more.
In addition to the amount of training, you must also consider the
types of training you’ve done recently. One of the first things I look
for in the past training of runners who begin working with me is lack
of balance, and one of the most important things I try to do in
designing a training program for a new athlete is to create more
balance. A well-balanced training program should have the following
basic elements:
• Easy runs
• Long runs
• Steep hill sprints
• Moderate progression runs
--- PAGE 172 ---
• Threshold runs
• Speed/specific-endurance intervals
• Strides and drills
Each of these elements should be present to some degree in your
training more or less throughout the training cycle. If any of them has
been absent in your recent training, you must add it. Of course, the
aim is not to achieve a perfect balance. Certain types of training
should have a larger or smaller overall presence in your training,
depending on your goals and other factors. And your training
priorities should always evolve from the extremes toward specificity
throughout the training cycle. But I rarely come across a runner who
has adequate balance in his or her training, and chances are you’re
no exception to this pattern.
Be aware that lack of balance may also result from doing too much
of a particular type of training. If there’s any specific type of training
that you have “done to death” over the past two years, you should
probably deemphasize it. For example, let’s suppose you’re a 5K
specialist and in every training cycle you do at least eight workouts
featuring 600-meter intervals at roughly 3K pace, because that’s
what your high school coach had you do to prepare for 5K cross-
country races. This type of training certainly can be beneficial for 5K
race performance, and I would not hesitate to have someone who’s
never done it start doing it, but in your case it will be better to move
away from it to some degree because the training stimulus is too
familiar to trigger any more improvement.
Also, review your recent training for workout types that you just
don’t seem to have gotten much out of. Often these workouts are the
same ones that have been done to death. In any case, they, too,
should probably be deemphasized. For example, let’s suppose
--- PAGE 173 ---
you’re a veteran marathon runner who’s done more easy 16-to 24-
mile long runs than you can remember, and recently you’ve felt that
this type of workout is not the endurance booster it used to be for
you. (Or, put another way, you seem to get all the endurance you’re
going to get from a very small number of such workouts.) In your
next training cycle, you should reduce the number of easy long runs
you do and add more moderately long to long runs at faster speeds
to stimulate new fitness adaptations.
Finally, look at the possibility of increasing the amount of specific
work—that is, work at or very near your goal race pace—in planning
your next training cycle. As we develop as runners, we become less
responsive to general training and increasingly able to capitalize on
greater amounts of specific training. Unless you have
overemphasized specific training in the past, you should look to
gently increase the amount of specific work you perform in your next
training cycle compared to recent cycles. Runners who train for half-
marathons and marathons, I find, are those most likely to
underutilize specific training and thus to benefit most from boosting
it.
2. Running Experience
The overall amount of running experience you have and the nature
of that experience should have a profound influence in shaping your
next training cycle. Beginning runners should focus on establishing a
solid foundation for their future development as runners by training
the extremes—that is, by focusing heavily on developing basic
aerobic fitness with moderate-intensity runs of various lengths and
basic neuromuscular fitness with very short, very high-intensity
efforts on hills and on the track. This training approach will develop
the beginning runner’s fitness level as rapidly as any alternative and
will lay the best foundation for further development.
--- PAGE 174 ---
As the seasons and years go by, assuming you train sensibly, your
training should evolve first by adding layer upon layer to this
foundation through increasing mileage and more challenging aerobic
workouts, including longer long runs, and also through more
challenging high-intensity muscle training. As these types of training
begin to reach a point of diminishing returns, gradually shift your
focus toward specific-endurance training for your primary race event.
The longer you continue training for competitive performance in
the sport of distance running, the more your overall training mix
should move away from general training at the extremes and the
more it should focus on specific endurance and optimal aerobic
support. The following table provides general parameters to guide
this developmental process.
Continuous Running
Experience
Major Training Priorities
1–4 Years • Gradually build easy mileage
• Increase long run distance
• Hill sprints
• Hill intervals
• Short intervals (including fartlek)
• Minimal specific-endurance training
5–7 Years • Continue building mileage
• Faster long runs
• Threshold runs
--- PAGE 175 ---
• Tougher speed workouts
• Gradually increase specific-endurance
training
8+ Years • Maximize mileage
• Very hard long runs
• Challenging threshold runs
• Increasingly emphasize specific-endurance
training
3. Age
The age of a runner can be difficult to dissociate from his or her
running experience. You very seldom encounter a veteran 12-year-
old runner, while most runners in their 50s have been at it for a
decade or more. Nevertheless, age is at least a semi-independent
factor to consider in planning a training cycle.
Runners in their late teens and early 20s have a much greater
margin for error in their training than older runners have. Virtually
any type of training that does not injure them or result in chronic
overtraining fatigue will improve their fitness and performance. Like
all runners, they will derive the greatest benefit from the most
appropriate training, but young runners are typically able to get a
greater benefit from less specific and even borderline-irrelevant
training than older runners. Nevertheless, runners of every age
should train as appropriately as possible.
Due to their strong recovery capacity, young runners generally do
not need to train as easy on their easy days as older runners do. If
--- PAGE 176 ---
you’re between 15 and 25 years old, you can probably train at least
moderately hard every time you run, assuming you have an active
background, if not a running background. You can reserve the very
slow recovery runs that older runners depend on for those rare days
when you feel especially lousy. However, by the same token, young
runners cannot expect to train quite as hard in their key workouts as
more experienced runners in their late 20s and early 30s. It takes
years of consistent training to reach the point where you are able to
tackle the toughest workouts you will ever do, and no runner under
the age of 26 has this foundation. It’s okay to do some gut-busting
training sessions when you’re young, but always hold back a little in
planning these workouts. Take the long view, and draw patience from
the knowledge that those epic track sessions and long threshold
runs you dream of doing are waiting for you just a few seasons down
the road.
If you suspect I don’t apply this wisdom with the young runners I
coach, guess again. Dathan Ritzenhein (age 25 at the time of this
writing) has chafed to train harder than I’ve allowed him to since the
day he started working with me, but I have held him back with a firm
hand. Each year I let him loose a little more—not as much as he
would like, but enough to make a difference. And Dathan will be the
first to admit that this imposed restraint has been good for him. He
feels stronger all the time, and he never feels overwhelmed by his
training the way he sometimes did before he began working with me,
when there was no one to hold him back.
The period between the mid-to late 20s and the mid-to late 30s
constitutes another stage in a runner’s development that requires a
slightly different approach to training. At this time, your capacity to
recover from hard training is decreasing, so you need to take it very
easy on your easy days to fully absorb your most recent hard
session and get ready for your next one. On the other hand, if you’ve
been training consistently for at least a few years now, you can
handle harder workouts than you could as a whippersnapper,
because your body has changed dramatically in response to all of
--- PAGE 177 ---
that past training. Your muscles, bones, joints, and neuroendocrine
system are now, in a concrete sense, far better designed for hard
training than they were when you were younger.
Somewhere between the ages of 40 and 45 a third stage in the
development of a runner begins. In this stage, it is extremely
important to get the most bang for your buck from workouts and to
eliminate as much waste as possible from your training. The majority
of your key workouts should be very race-specific. There’s not much
to be gained from general training anymore. Your body has adapted
to so many different training stimuli over so many years that there
are few remaining stimuli that are capable of triggering fresh fitness
adaptations, so you have to choose very carefully. You’re a long way
from those early days when virtually anything that got your heart rate
up made you a better runner. On the positive side, your years of
training and racing have taught you many things about yourself as a
runner, and you can use this knowledge to select just the right
alterations to your training approach that will keep you moving
forward.
There should be few or no “junk miles” in your training after age
40. Accumulated wear and tear on your body has probably already
put you past the point of being able to set new personal records, and
continuing to fill your schedule with a lot of basic aerobic runs will do
more harm, in the form of additional wear and tear, than it will do
good, in the form of new aerobic adaptations. You’re better off doing
just three or four focused sessions per week in the muscle-training,
aerobic-support (with an emphasis on threshold runs), and specific-
endurance categories, and doing strength training or cardiovascular
cross-training on the other days.
Masters runners also need to be careful with speed work (training
at 5K race pace and faster). The muscles and connective tissues
have lost elasticity by this age, making them more susceptible to
strain during high-speed running. As a masters runner, you should
do as much speed work as you can safely handle, and as is relevant
--- PAGE 178 ---
to your event goals, but be prepared to find that you cannot safely
handle very much. Adjusting your speed work for your age does not
necessarily or exclusively mean doing less of it, though. You can
also move some or all of it onto hills, which will reduce tissue strain
at higher intensities, or you can simply slow it down a little—
replacing 1,500-meter-pace intervals with 3,000-meter-pace
intervals, for example.
The following three tables provide an example of how a runner’s
training might evolve over the course of his or her running career,
based on the guidelines I’ve given. Each table represents a week of
foundation-period training for a short-term goal of running a 34:00
10K at a specific age: 24, 34, and 44.
Age 24 (Total miles: 66 +/-)
Sunday 2 hours easy/moderate
Monday 45 min. easy + 10 × 8-sec. short hill
sprint
Tuesday 30 min. moderate + 5 × 3-min. hill
climbs w/recovery jog back down
Wednesday 70 min. moderate
Thursday 45 min. moderate
Friday AM: 20 min. moderate PM: 40 min. w/20-min.
@ threshold pace
--- PAGE 179 ---
Saturday 50 min. moderate
Age 34 (Total miles: 58 +/-)
Sunday 1 hour 40 min. easy/moderate
Monday 45 min. easy + 10 × 8-sec. short hill sprint
Tuesday 20-min. warm-up
Ladder intervals: 6 min., 5 min., 4 min., 3 min., 2 min., 1 min.
w/3-min. active recoveries
10-min. cool-down
Wednesday 60 min. easy
Thursday 45 min. easy
Friday 20-min. warm-up
2 × 3K @ 10K goal pace w/3-min. active recoveries
10-min. cool-down
Saturday 40 min. easy
Age 44 (Total miles: 48 +/-)
Sunday 80 min. w/ 20 min. @ threshold pace
--- PAGE 180 ---
Monday Off or X-train
Tuesday 20-min. warm-up
8 × 3 min. @ 10K pace w/1-min. active recoveries
20-min. cool-down
Wednesday 60 min. moderate
Thursday 40 min. moderate
Friday 20-min. warm-up
5 × 3-min. hill intervals @ 5K intensity, w/recovery jog back
down
20-min. cool-down
Saturday Off or X-train
4. Past Race Performances
Your past race performances provide valuable information that you
can use to guide your future training. In particular, I suggest that you
consider your very best race performances and the training that
preceded them. Try to identify those aspects of your training that
were most responsible for your success in these events, and
incorporate them into your future training.
What was different about the training that preceded your lifetime
best 5K, 10K, half-marathon, and/or marathon that was different from
the training that preceded less satisfying race performances? Were
you running more mileage? Getting more recovery between hard
--- PAGE 181 ---
workouts? Doing a better job of staying injury-free? Hitting the track
more often?
Whichever training patterns you identify as being most responsible
for your greatest racing successes, be sure that your next training
plan also includes them, even if you’re targeting a race of a different
distance. Assuming you have at least a modest amount of past
racing experience to draw upon, your best-ever race performances
will provide a good indication of the general training patterns to
which you respond best. Of course, they may also tell you what your
ideal race distance is, but even if you are now training for a longer or
shorter race, this information is relevant, because the training
patterns that get you into the best shape at any specific race
distance are likely to also help you get into the best possible shape
for other race distances, assuming you make commonsense
adjustments for the different speed and endurance demands of your
current race focus.
There is really very little difference in the type of fitness that is
needed to run your best 5K and the type that is needed to run your
best marathon, or any intermediate distance. (Elite male runners run
less than 45 seconds per mile slower in the marathon than they do in
the 5K.) If you’re in shape to run your best time at any distance
between 5K and the marathon, you won’t be far off optimal shape for
any other distance. In preparing for a race of any distance, you can’t
go wrong by relying on training practices that are proven to prepare
you optimally for any other race distance. Simply contextualize the
training differently based on the specific distance of your next peak
race.
--- PAGE 182 ---
Your past race performances provide valuable information you
can use in designing your next training plan. © Alison Wade
I am not suggesting that you simply duplicate your past training in
any degree of detail. If your best race ever was a 5K you ran in
college 10 years ago, don’t go and contact your college coach to
have him e-mail you his favorite track workouts. What I am
suggesting is that you reuse general training patterns that seem to
have worked well for you in the past.
For example, suppose your best past race performance was a
half-marathon in which you set a big surprise personal record (PR).
When you consider how the training that preceded it was different
from the training that preceded less-satisfying half-marathons, you
recall that when you set your PR you were focusing on shorter races
(5K’s and 10K’s), and you raced the half-marathon as a lark, only
because a friend talked you into it, whereas all of your other half-
--- PAGE 183 ---
marathons were run as tune-up races during marathon-focused
training. This information may tell you that you respond best to a
training approach that emphasizes high-intensity workouts and
slightly deemphasizes long runs and overall mileage as compared to
what might work best for other runners.
If your past racing experience is limited, you will of course be
limited in your ability to use your history of competitive performances
to identify the types of training to which you respond best. In this
case, just use the other nine self-assessment factors discussed in
this chapter to customize your next training cycle. After you complete
the peak race in which this next training cycle culminates, you’ll have
more material to use to determine which particular training patterns
work best for you.
5. Short-Term Goal
Your short-term goal is a performance goal you wish to achieve in
your next peak race. These goals almost always take the form of a
specific finishing time in a chosen race of a certain distance on a
particular date. Always set a short-term goal at least 12 weeks
ahead of time. Seldom, if ever, will you need more than 24 weeks of
focused preparation to achieve a short-term goal, but you can
always set a short-term goal farther out if you don’t intend to
immediately begin focused preparation for it. The lower your current
fitness level is and the longer your next peak race, the more
preparation time you should allow.
Most runners with at least a couple of years’ worth of racing
experience are pretty good at setting realistic race time goals. All it
takes is one overambitious goal resulting in disaster on race day to
correct an inflated sense of one’s current running abilities. If you
have minimal race experience or are planning to race at an
unfamiliar distance, you can use a performance equivalency
calculator to help you set a time goal. Using such a calculator, you
--- PAGE 184 ---
input a race time at one distance and then the program spits out
predicted finishing times, or equivalent performances, at other races
distances. You can find a good one at www.mcmillanrunning.com.
In any case, the purpose of setting a short-term goal is not to
predict the future. You can and most likely will have to adjust your
goal time based on your fitness development as the training cycle
unfolds and race day draws nearer. The true purpose of setting a
short-term goal is to establish parameters for the training cycle that
will culminate in that peak race. The objective of your training is to
develop the capacity to sustain your goal pace for the full race
distance on race day. Knowing how fast and how far you have to run
to achieve your goal tells you what sorts of race-specific workouts
you’ll need to be able to perform in the final weeks of training.
Knowing the precise nature of these peak workouts—and
understanding the principles of adaptive running—enables you to
then determine the general progression of key workouts you will
need to arrange between the start of the training cycle and the
sharpening phase. These workouts must serve to establish the
proper foundation of aerobic and neuromuscular fitness and then
build incrementally more race-specific fitness on top of this
foundation as the weeks go by.
6. Injury History
Some runners are more injury-prone than others. If you consider
yourself injury-prone, I recommend that you include more hill running
in your future training than you might otherwise do. In addition, you
should take a more cautious approach to increasing your running
mileage and increasing the volume of high-intensity running in your
training.
Nearly all of the common overuse injuries that runners suffer from
are caused in part by lack of strength in one or more muscles, which
in turn causes joint instability. Short hill sprints boost running-specific
--- PAGE 185 ---
strength and power tremendously. They subject the muscles and
joint tissues to the highest levels of stress for very short periods of
time, thus stimulating the greatest possible strengthening
adaptations without themselves causing injuries.
I prescribe short hill sprints for all of my runners, but my injury-
prone runners do more of them, usually by continuing to do hill
sprints twice per week throughout the training cycle instead of
moving from two sessions to one session midway through it. You can
further reduce your risk of injury by moving some of your high-
intensity workouts—intervals and threshold runs—from level terrain
to inclines. This will reduce impact forces and joint strain while
further increasing your running-specific strength.
The use of hill running as a primary injury-prevention technique
seems strange to many runners, but it really works. Most of the
runners I coach had terrible injury problems before they started
working with me. None of them used steep hill sprints in their training
prior to joining my team. Steep hill sprints subsequently became a
staple for each of them. All of them have been almost completely
injury-free ever since.
Running injuries most often occur during periods when the training
workload (either total mileage or high-intensity running mileage) is
increasing. Injury-prone runners are most likely to get hurt at such
times. Thus, if you have a history of breakdowns, you may need to
plan a longer training cycle with a more gradual workload ramp-up
than a less injury-prone runner would need.
Once you’ve built up to an appropriate workload for peak fitness, I
suggest that you maintain it. While it is widely assumed that high
running mileage causes running injuries, it’s much more accurate to
say that increasing running mileage causes running injuries. In itself,
high running mileage protects against injuries, because it produces
adaptations that render the bones, muscles, and connective tissues
better suited to handle repetitive impact. Maintaining a consistently
--- PAGE 186 ---
high running volume helps you avoid the too-sudden increases in
running volume that are much riskier, because they apply stress to
the bones, muscles, and connective tissues faster than these tissues
can adapt.
Consistently training at a variety of paces will also protect you
against injury. Many runners make the mistake of completely
phasing out high-intensity running at certain times of year. This
greatly increases their chances of getting injured when they start
running fast again. By including at least a small amount of high-
intensity training at all times, you can minimize your risk of
experiencing this particular type of injury.
7. Event-Specific Strength and Weakness
An important concept that I picked up from the “Italian school” of
running, as it has come to be known, is the notion that there are two
types of runner at any given race distance. First, there are those who
bring more speed than endurance to a particular race distance. What
this means, essentially, is that these runners would probably fare
better at a shorter distance than they would at a longer one. A good
example of this type of runner is Shayne Culpepper. A 5,000-meter
specialist, Culpepper is packed with fast-twitch muscle fibers and
therefore races successfully at 1,500 meters, too, but not at 10,000
meters.
The second type of runner at any given race distance is the type
that brings more endurance than speed to the event, meaning he or
she would probably perform better in a longer event than in a shorter
one. A good example of this type of runner is Bob Kennedy, who was
also a 5,000-meter specialist (and still holds the American record in
this event, at 12:58). Kennedy is more slow-twitch and fatigue-
resistant than Culpepper; consequently, he competed at a very high
level at 10,000 meters, but he never even dared to enter an elite-
level 1,500-meter race.
--- PAGE 187 ---
The essence of the concept is that every runner has an event-
specific strength and weakness at every race distance. If you bring
more speed than endurance to a given race distance, then speed is
your event-specific strength and endurance your event-specific
weakness at that race distance. It’s important to know your event-
specific strength and weakness for the race distance you plan to
peak for next because it affects how you ought to train. In particular,
your specific-endurance training should be based in your strength
and move toward your weakness.
If speed is your event-specific strength, the objective of your
specific-endurance workouts is to extend your speed over race
distance. You start with short intervals at your goal race pace and
then try to go longer and longer at the same pace. If you’re more
fatigue resistant, the goal of your specific-endurance workouts is to
increase your speed over distance. Start with slow intervals of longer
duration and then go faster and faster as you adapt.
Let’s look at an example. Suppose you’re training for a 10K peak
race. First, ask yourself whether, given appropriate training, you are
better suited to 5K racing or half-marathon racing. If you’re not sure,
simply ask yourself: If I were racing a runner of equal ability over
10K, would my best chance of beating her be to outsprint her at the
finish, or to push the pace early and outlast her? If your weapon is
your kick, or you’re better suited to 5K racing than half-marathon
racing, you should concentrate on building 10K-specific fitness by
extending your speed in race-specific interval workouts. If your 10K
weapon is your ability to outlast well-matched competitors, or you’re
better suited to half-marathon racing than 5K racing, you should
focus on building 10K-specific fitness by increasing your speed over
distance in race-specific interval workouts.
The table below presents a sample 12-week progression of
specific-endurance workouts for a speed runner and a fatigue-
resistant runner who share the goal of running a 40-minute 10K
(6:26 per mile) in their next peak race. It is an oversimplified example
--- PAGE 188 ---
in the sense that both progression patterns are more linear than they
need to be. Ideally, each type of runner would do a few workouts
from the other type’s progression, and both would mix in some other
types of specific-endurance workouts, such as longer hill intervals
and ladder intervals. Nevertheless, the examples clearly illustrate the
concept of training from one’s event-specific strength toward one’s
event-specific weakness, which is important.
Speed Runner Fatigue-Resistant Runner
Week 1 6 × 400m @ 1:36 w/400m
jog recoveries
4 × 1K @ 4:20 w/400m jog
recoveries
Week 2 8 × 400m @ 1:36 w/400m
jog recoveries
5 × 1K @ 4:16 w/400m jog
recoveries
Week 3 6 × 600m @ 2:24 w/400m
jog recoveries
5 × 1K @ 4:12 w/400m jog
recoveries
Week 4
(Recovery week)
6 × 400m @ 1:36 w/400m
jog recoveries
4 × 1K @ 4:12 w/400m jog
recoveries
Week 5 4 × 800m @ 3:12 w/400m
jog recoveries
4 × 1 mile @ 6:48 w/400m
jog recoveries
Week 6 6 × 800m @ 3:12 w/400m
jog recoveries
4 × 1 mile @ 6:42 w/400m
jog recoveries
Week 7 6 × 1K @ 4:00 w/400m jog
recoveries
5 × 1 mile @ 6:38 w/400m
jog recoveries
--- PAGE 189 ---
Week 8
(Recovery week)
4 × 800m @ 3:12 w/400m
jog recoveries
4 × 1 mile @ 6:36 w/400m
jog recoveries
Week 9 4 × 1 mile @ 6:24 w/400m
jog recoveries
4 × 2K @ 6:32 w/400m jog
recoveries
Week 10 5 × 1 mile @ 6:24 w/400m
jog recoveries
4 × 2K @ 6:28 w/400m jog
recoveries
Week 11 4 × 2K @ 6:24 w/400m jog
recoveries
4 × 2K @ 6:24 w/400m jog
recoveries
Week 12 (Taper
week)
2 × 2K @ 6:24 w/400m jog
recoveries
2 × 2K @ 6:24 w/400m jog
recoveries
You will have noticed that the two progressions come together with
identical workouts in the final two weeks of training. This is because
the two runners share the same goal. The specific fitness
requirements of running a 40:00 10K are the same for all runners,
regardless of type, so both speed runners and fatigue-resistant
runners who share this goal should perform the most race-specific
interval workout possible in the final weeks of training.
The starting points for any speed/fatigue-resistant pair of runners
with a common race goal are different, and therefore so too is the
path toward the endpoint, but the endpoint itself is the same.
If you’re training to peak for a 5K or a half-marathon, go through
the same exercise. Obviously, whether you’re a speed type or an
endurance type, your intervals will be shorter and faster for the 5K
than they are for the 10K, and they’ll be longer and slower for the
--- PAGE 190 ---
half-marathon. The marathon is a case unto itself, because everyone
brings more speed than endurance to this event.
8. Recovery Profile
Individual runners recover differently from different types and
patterns of training. Generally, the speedier you are, the faster you’ll
recover from faster workouts compared to those who are more
fatigue-resistant. Likewise, the more fatigue-resistant you are, the
faster you’ll recover from long runs relative to speed-type runners.
But some runners recover from all challenging workouts (fast and
long) either faster or slower than most other runners of equal ability.
Typically, the higher your overall talent level and fitness level are, the
faster you’ll recover. The older you get, the slower you’ll recover.
There are four variables you can manipulate to accommodate your
personal recovery patterns (or recovery profile) when designing a
training plan:
1. The number of hard workouts you do each week
2. The distribution of your hard workouts throughout the week
3. The degree of difficulty of your hard workouts
4. The amount of running you do between hard workouts
My adaptive running system uses a standard weekly distribution of
key workouts that I recommend for every runner, regardless of his or
her recovery profile. I believe this format is universally optimal for
two reasons. First, it incorporates plenty of variety in workout types.
Second, it distributes the key training stimuli throughout the week to
--- PAGE 191 ---
provide maximum recovery opportunity following each of them.
Here’s the format:
Sunday Monday Tuesday WednesdayThursday Friday Saturday
Long
Run
Hill
Sprints
Hard
workout
(speed,
specific-
endurance,
threshold)
Hard
workout
(speed,
specific-
endurance,
threshold)
Using this workout schedule takes care of the first two variables
listed above, leaving variables 3 and 4 as those you should focus on
manipulating to ensure that your training schedule provides the right
balance of training stress and recovery opportunity. The challenge
level of your key workouts should be such that your fitness improves
gradually and steadily throughout the training cycle. If your key
workouts are too easy, your fitness level will not improve quickly
enough to land you in peak shape for your peak race. If your key
workouts are too hard, you will not recover sufficiently between key
workouts to see your performance level rise from week to week. The
challenge level of your key workouts needs to hit the sweet spot
between these two extremes that cause fitness stagnation.
How is this done? When drawing up a training plan, be a little
conservative in designing your key workouts for the first four to six
weeks of training. In other words, plan key workouts that you are
certain to have no difficulty completing and recovering from. If all
goes well in those first four to six weeks, go ahead and raise the
challenge level of your key workouts more aggressively in
subsequent weeks. By keeping a log of your performances in those
--- PAGE 192 ---
early key workouts and by paying attention to how your body feels
during the early weeks of training, you should get a good sense of
the proper rate at which to increase the challenge level of
subsequent key workouts. Here’s how your first six weeks of long
runs might look if you take this approach:
Week 1: 7 miles easy
Week 2: 8 miles easy
Week 3: 9 miles easy
Week 4: 9.5 miles easy + 0.5-mile moderate progression
Week 5: 10 easy + 1.5-mile moderate uphill progression
Week 6: 11 miles easy + 2-mile moderate uphill progression
As for variable number 4—the amount of running you do between
key workouts—the guiding principles are similar. Your general goal
should be to do as much running between key workouts as you can
without hampering your performance progress in these workouts. It’s
easy enough to make adjustments to the duration and pace of your
easier runs on the fly as you proceed through a training cycle, but
because easy runs make an important contribution to overall running
volume, and because running volume is a crucial variable to optimize
in designing a training plan, it’s best to plan targets for the frequency
and duration of your easy runs ahead of time.
These targets will need to depend on your knowledge of your
recovery profile. For example, some runners find that they typically
perform better in a hard workout after completing an easy run the
preceding day than they do after a day of total rest. If this is the case
--- PAGE 193 ---
for you, then you should probably schedule easy recovery runs
between key workouts and take days off only when you really need
them.
9. Long-Term Goal
Most runners—at least most runners under the age of 40—have at
least one long-term goal. This is a performance goal that you wish to
achieve eventually, but which requires more than a year’s worth of
additional development time, such that it cannot function as a short-
term goal. Nevertheless, long-term goals can and should have an
important bearing on your immediate training. There are various
ways you can tweak the training you do in your next training cycle to
put your development on the proper track toward your long-term goal
(or goals) without affecting your ability to achieve your short-term
goal.
Almost all of the runners I coach come to me fresh out of college,
having never raced farther than 10 kilometers, and have long-term
aspirations at the marathon distance. Most of them wait at least two
years after college before attempting their first marathon, and I
encourage them not to expect to run their lifetime-best marathon for
another four to 10 years after that. During those transitional years, I
prescribe training that will set up my runners for a successful
marathon debut in a couple of years even as they continue to train
for peak performance in races at the half-marathon distance and
below. Specifically, they do more and longer long runs and long
threshold runs than they would do if they never intended to run a
marathon. This is one basic example of how a long-term goal can
affect immediate training.
The other thing your long-term goals should do is encourage
patience. As I explained in the above section on running experience,
it takes years of consistent training to reach a level of development
at which you are capable of performing the training that is necessary
--- PAGE 194 ---
to achieve your lifetime-best race performances. If you understand
this fact, you can mentally sketch out years of increasing and
evolving training designed to develop your fitness step by step
toward its lifetime-peak level, much as you plan out 12 to 24 weeks
of increasing and evolving training to elevate your fitness step by
step toward a short-term peak level within each training cycle. This
little exercise should help you avoid rushing your development and
training too hard and too soon. Your long-term planning does not
require any detail, although it shouldn’t take too much thought to
settle on a general idea of the sort of training you will eventually
have to do to achieve a specific long-term goal.
10. Motivational Profile
Individual runners are as different in their psychological makeup
as they are in their physical characteristics. Certain psychological
characteristics—which I lump together under the classification of
“motivational profile”—have implications for how each runner should
train that are as important as those physical characteristics.
However, it’s harder to formulate concrete guidelines for these
psychological implications.
The gist of the matter is that each runner has certain motivational
quirks that cause him or her to make training mistakes. It’s important
to understand what these quirks are and account for them in the
planning (and execution) process as much as possible. Some quirks
are motivational weak spots that must be addressed with measures
that provide a motivational boost. Other quirks are motivational
excesses that must be addressed with measures that apply a
prudent braking force.
For example, some of the runners I coach have an excess of
motivation that makes them feel compelled to “beat” the target pace
times and split times I give them for workouts. In some workouts—
specifically, in those that call for a maximal or near-maximal effort—
--- PAGE 195 ---
this is not a problem, but in other workouts it is a problem. Running
too fast in race-pace workouts is undesirable because the whole
point of these workouts is to maximize race-pace-specific
adaptations. I deal with my overeager runners by sometimes giving
them target pace levels and split times that are slightly slower than I
really want them to run, or by turning their hyper-competitiveness to
their advantage by turning certain workouts into a pacing game,
where the goal is to see how close they can come to “nailing” their
targets perfectly. It might be a little harder for you to play such tricks
on yourself than it is for me to play them on my runners, but if you
have this compulsion to “better” your target times in every workout,
you should give it a try.
One of the more common motivational weaknesses is a tendency
to lose focus in one’s training when there are long lapses between
competitive opportunities. If you have this problem, you may need to
schedule more frequent tune-up races than other runners do.

--- PAGE 196 ---
Jorge Torres © Alison Wade
Runner Profile: Jorge Torres
Jorge Torres and his twin brother, Edwardo, joined my team after
graduating from the University of Colorado, where they ran for four
years under the tutelage of coach Mark Wetmore. I’ve known Mark
for more than 30 years, and I know his training philosophy intimately.
He puts a strong emphasis on aerobic training, which is appropriate
at the college level, so I could safely assume that Jorge had a strong
aerobic foundation in place when he started working with me.
Jorge’s long-term goal was to become a marathon runner, which
meant that I needed to continue building his aerobic foundation with
harder long runs, longer tempo runs, and more volume. At the same
time, Jorge is naturally fast—he has a lot of fast-twitch muscle for a
distance runner—and he had not yet done a lot of strength training at
the time he began working with me. So I integrated more specific-
endurance work and short intervals into his training as well. I was
confident that this training emphasis would improve his performance
at shorter distances, which would ultimately improve his performance
in the marathon.
The risk I took with Jorge was that I basically gave him more of
everything, and he had a history of frequent injuries and illnesses, so
I knew I had to be careful with him. Fortunately, I discovered that in
addition to being exceptionally fast, Jorge is also an exceptionally
fast adapter, meaning his fitness level responds very quickly to new
training challenges. This knowledge has enabled me to coax his
fitness along slowly and carefully at most times and then get him
race-ready very quickly with just a few hard sharpening workouts.
So far, so good. Jorge won the U.S. National Track and Field
Championships at 10,000 meters in 2006 and is on track for a
--- PAGE 197 ---
successful marathon debut at the time of this writing.
--- PAGE 198 ---
Creating a Training Plan 7
         
Creating your own training plan can be an intimidating prospect if
you’ve never done it before. And the prospect of creating your own
training plan based on my adaptive running system—which is still
rather new to you—might be even more intimidating. But rest
assured that with a modest effort you can create your own,
customized adaptive running training plan that will give you better
race results than any ready-made plan you might choose to rely on.
Also, bear in mind that in the adaptive running system, training
plans carry only limited responsibility for developing your race-
specific fitness. Equally important is the process of choosing the
most appropriate workout to do day by day (whether it’s the workout
in your plan, or a slightly different workout, or a totally different
workout) based on your body’s response to completed training. So
even if the training plan you design isn’t perfect (and no plan ever is),
you can continually improve it on the fly.
The last chapter of this book presents a selection of ready-made
adaptive running training plans. There’s a low-volume, a moderate-
volume, and a high-volume plan for each of the four popular road-
--- PAGE 199 ---
race distances. You’re welcome to choose and follow the most
appropriate plan from this selection as a way to become more
comfortable with the adaptive running system before graduating to
creating your own training plan from scratch. To get the most out of
these ready-made plans, you’ll still have to modify workouts as you
go based on your body’s response to the workouts you’ve done. In
doing so, you’ll develop greater decision-making confidence and
self-knowledge, which will help you design a better training plan
when it’s time to pursue your next peak-race performance.
You may also use the ready-made training plans in Chapter 12 as
templates to guide you through the process of creating your own
training plan. In the preceding chapters, I’ve given you a large
number of tips and guidelines regarding how to develop your aerobic
support, your neuromuscular fitness, and your specific endurance,
but you have not yet seen how these three threads of training are
woven together to create the fabric of a complete adaptive running
training plan. The most important function of the plans in Chapter 12
is to provide this big picture. Each plan represents a standard
adaptive running program that is customized only on the basis of
peak-race distance and average running volume. You can use the
plan that best suits you as a foundation for a more fully customized
plan, which you’ll create by making modifications based on the self-
assessment guidelines provided in the previous chapter and the
training-plan design guidelines presented in this chapter.
Or you can go straight to designing your own fully customized
adaptive running training plan from scratch. This process has eight
steps. They are as follows:
Step 1: Choose a peak race and a race goal.
Step 2: Pick a start date and plan duration.
--- PAGE 200 ---
Step 3: Decide on the appropriate running volume and
frequency and weekly workout structure.
Step 4: Divide your plan into introductory, fundamental, and
sharpening periods.
Step 5: Plan your peak training week.
Step 6: Schedule tune-up races and recovery weeks.
Step 7: Schedule progressions for interval workouts, threshold
workouts, and long runs.
Step 8: Fill in the remainder of the schedule.
Let’s now discuss each of these eight steps in detail. To make this
discussion more concrete, I’ll create an actual adaptive running
training plan for a hypothetical runner as we go along.
Step 1: Choose a Peak Race and a Race Goal.
When it comes to designing training plans, the starting point is the
endpoint. And the endpoint is a specific race in a certain place on a
definite date. You may wish to do more than one race in the near
future, but you will choose one as your top-priority peak race—the
race you wish to start with peak fitness and finish with the best time
you can possibly achieve. Until and unless you have chosen a peak
race and a race goal to aim for, you don’t even need a training plan.
The whole purpose of designing a training plan is to create a
sensible map of workouts leading from your current fitness state to a
state of maximal race-specific fitness just in time for your peak race.
Choosing a peak race is something you can do with almost total
freedom, as long as you exercise common sense, which, in my
--- PAGE 201 ---
experience, most runners have. Common sense tells you not to
choose a marathon taking place three weeks from now as your peak
race if you’ve never run farther than 10 miles. Beyond this caution to
exercise your best judgment, I am not here to tell you what your
peak race should be. The purpose of choosing a peak race is to get
yourself excited and to generate the motivation and focus you’ll need
to take your running to the next level. Only you can decide which
peak-race option gets you most excited.
In most cases, you’ll want to establish a time goal to achieve in
your peak race. Running is primarily a sport of competition against
oneself, and the stopwatch is the means by which we keep score in
that competition. Setting ambitious but achievable time goals serves
to increase one’s motivation to train hard and give one’s best effort in
the race itself, and it often enhances the satisfaction of the race
experience. Ultimately it matters little whether the goal is achieved.
In fact, I’m fond of saying that the best goal setters achieve their race
time goals only half the time. If you always achieve your race time
goals, you are surely setting them too low. And if you never achieve
your goals, clearly they are too ambitious.
How do you know what is an appropriate race time goal? As I
mentioned in the previous chapter, if you have relevant past racing
experience, then experience will guide you. Otherwise, just set a
“guess goal” based on past performances at other race distances, on
workout performances, or on how your fitness compares to that of
training partners with experience at your peak-race distance. You’ll
be able to refine this goal as the training process unfolds and your
peak race draws near.
For the purpose of illustrating the eight-step process of training
plan design, let’s choose a marathon peak race and a goal time of
2:39.
Step 2: Pick a Start Date and Plan Duration.
--- PAGE 202 ---
Another limitation on appropriate peak-race selection that I hinted
at in the previous section is that the peak race must be far enough in
the future to afford you enough time to train for optimal performance.
On the other hand, it also should not be too far in the future or else
you won’t feel that all-important sense of urgency that motivates you
to train hard, and you’ll be at risk of peaking too early and becoming
“stale” by race day. You may, however, choose a peak race that’s
many months in the future and simply delay the start date of formal
training for that event until an appropriate time while focusing on
other, more immediate goals.
The ideal duration of a training plan depends on the distance of
the peak race and on your current fitness level. For most runners,
longer races require more preparation time than shorter races
because it takes a while to build the endurance needed to go the
distance comfortably. The higher your current fitness level is,
however, the less time you need to prepare for a race of any
distance. The elite runners on my team maintain such a high fitness
level throughout the year that they may devote only eight to 10
weeks of formal preparation to the marathon. In essence, they
always have a solid foundation of introductory and early-
fundamental-period training in their legs. Thus, at most times of the
year their training is focused toward simply maintaining health and
well-rounded fitness and inching their fitness in the direction of
specificity to their next major competition. Only relatively short time
blocks need to be devoted to aggressive, specific fundamental
training and sharpening.
The situation of professional runners is unique in that they typically
train to peak for three to four championship races per year. Thus,
they are required to sketch out a plan for the entire year and to view
the process of training for each championship race only semi-
independently of the process of training for the others. The situation
is very different for the typical amateur competitive runner, who aims
for peak fitness only once or twice per year and does not sustain a
consistently high level of fitness throughout the year, due to the other
--- PAGE 203 ---
life priorities that periodically take time away from training, and to the
occasional injury. (Elite runners get injured, too, but they are much
more likely to maintain a high level of fitness despite their
breakdowns thanks to aggressive rehabilitation and cross-training
efforts.) Consequently, the type of training plan that is most often
appropriate for the typical competitive runner is one that assumes a
modest level of starting fitness and is strictly focused on a single
peak race.
This is not to say that amateur competitive runners cannot design
and follow yearlong, multi-peak training plans as most elite runners
do. In fact, as an amateur competitive runner you stand to benefit no
less than elite runners do from maintaining a consistently high level
of fitness year-round and taking advantage of this fitness by peaking
three or four times a year. Nevertheless, this approach just isn’t
realistic for most amateur competitive runners.
So, how long should your training plan be if you’re in the typical
situation of starting a training cycle at a level of fitness that is well
below your desired peak fitness level? Simply put: Long enough to
develop your fitness from its current level to the desired peak level at
a rate that is neither hurried nor dawdling. In most cases, the optimal
duration falls within the ranges presented in the following table.
Peak-Race Distance Optimal Training-Plan Duration
5K 12–16 weeks
10K 14–18 weeks
Half-Marathon 16–20 weeks
--- PAGE 204 ---
Marathon 18–24 weeks
The higher your current fitness level is, the shorter your plan may
be within the optimal range. The durations of the ready-made
training plans presented in chapter 12 are 12 weeks for 5K, 14
weeks for 10K, 16 weeks for the half-marathon, and 20 weeks for the
marathon. We will design a 20-week marathon training plan for the
purpose of illustrating the training-plan design process.
Step 3: Decide on the Appropriate Running Volume and
Frequency and Weekly Workout Structure.
Weekly running mileage is the most important variable that
distinguishes individual training plans for the same peak-race
distance. The best marathon training plan for one runner might have
a peak volume of 40 miles in a week, while for another runner the
peak running volume might be 120 miles in a week. If the runner for
whom the 40-miles-per-week plan was most appropriate attempted
to follow the 120-miles-per-week plan, she would quickly get injured.
On the other hand, if the runner for whom the 120-miles-per-week
plan was most appropriate followed the 40-miles-per-week plan, he
would arrive at race day far short of peak fitness and fail to achieve
his race goal.
To choose an appropriate peak weekly mileage target, consider
your recent past training volume, how many times per week you plan
to run, and the approximate distance you plan to run in your longest
run. I recommend that every runner, including beginners, run at least
six times per week, if possible. You need to exercise daily just for the
sake of your health, and since you’re a runner you might as well run
every day. At the peak level of training, the typical weekday run
should be at least four miles long. The peak length of the Sunday
long run should be at least five miles for beginning 5K runners and
--- PAGE 205 ---
20 miles for beginning marathon runners. These parameters
establish 25 miles as the lowest recommended peak weekly running
volume level for beginning and very low-key competitive runners
training for a 5K, and 40 miles for beginning and very low-key
competitive runners training for a marathon.
The absolute bare minimum running frequency for progress as a
runner is three times per week. If, for whatever reason, you choose
to run only three to five times each week, I still recommend that you
work out at least six times per week, doing some form of cross-
training on your non-running days. If you’ve never run daily before,
or have not done so in a while, you should not start doing so
abruptly. The tissues of your lower extremities will need more than
24 hours to repair themselves and grow stronger between runs. Start
with three or four short runs per week and do non-impact cross-
training workouts on non-running days. After a few weeks, substitute
a cross-training workout with a run and continue in this fashion until
you’re running six times per week.
Seventy miles is the maximum number of weekly miles you should
attempt to pack into a training week that does not include more than
one run per day on any day. If you’re an experienced and highly
competitive runner who is serious about achieving maximal
performance but unwilling or unable to run twice on some days, then
you should aim for a peak running volume of close to 70 miles per
week, regardless of your peak-race distance.
For most experienced runners, running volume is limited by a lack
of willingness to run more than a certain amount, given other life
priorities, and not by an inability to run more. I cannot object to this
choice. However, as a coach I am all too aware that the more you
run, within your personal limits (which increase with training
experience), the better you will perform. So my advice is that you
gradually increase your running volume from one training cycle to
the next until you reach the highest level you are comfortable with (in
relation to a particular peak-race distance), and then hold it at that
--- PAGE 206 ---
level. Avoid increasing your peak weekly running mileage by more
than 50 percent compared to your most recently completed training
cycle.
In chapter 3, I presented a table of weekly running mileage
guidelines for five different categories of runner and for each of the
four popular road-race distances. Use this table, the 50 percent rule,
and the other guidelines given in this section to settle on an
appropriate peak weekly running mileage for your next training plan.
Like everything about adaptive running, this decision is subject to
revision. You can scale your training volume up or back based on
how your body responds to the workouts that you plan. Also, after
completing the plan you can assess your general response to the
volume level of the plan and use this assessment to settle on the
best volume level for your next plan. For example, if you feel that the
volume level was close to the maximal amount you could handle, but
that your maximum increased slightly as an effect of experiencing
the training process, you might choose to add 10 percent more
running volume to your next plan.
To return to our illustration, let’s suppose that our 20-week
marathon training plan is being designed for a very competitive
runner who has run as much as 60 miles a week and wants to
improve on the race results he achieved through this level of training,
but is unwilling to run more than once a day. Therefore we will set his
maximal weekly running volume at 70 miles.
The final task to perform before you begin to schedule actual
workouts is to establish a standard weekly workout schedule.
Settling on a running frequency is a part of this task but not the
whole of it—the other part is deciding which types of runs you wish
to do on each day of the typical week. In my adaptive running
system, it is standard to perform steep hill sprints (preceded by an
easy run) on Monday, high-intensity runs (threshold runs, interval
workouts) on Tuesday and Friday, and a long run on Sunday. I have
found that this distribution of workouts provides the optimal balance
--- PAGE 207 ---
of stress and recovery for the vast majority of runners. Thus, I
recommend that you follow this template unless you have a
compelling reason not to. If you do use this template, all you have to
do is fill out the typical training week with the appropriate number of
additional easy and moderate workouts. Following are suggested
templates for 5, 6, 7, 10, and 12 runs per week.
5 Runs per Week (appropriate for 20–50 miles per week)
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday ThursdayFriday Saturday
Long
Run
Easy Run +
Hill Sprints
Hard
Run
Easy/Moderate
Run
Off or X-
Train
Hard
Run
Off or X-
Train
6 Runs per Week (appropriate for 30–60 miles per week)
Sunday Monday TuesdayWednesdayThursdayFriday Saturday
Long
Run
Easy Run +
Hill Sprints
Hard
Run
Moderate
Run
Easy Run Hard
Run
Off or X-
Train
7 Runs per Week (appropriate for 45–70 miles per week)
Sunday Monday TuesdayWednesdayThursdayFriday Saturday
Long
Run
Easy Run +
Hill Sprints
Hard
Run
Moderate
Run
Easy Run Hard
Run
Easy
Run
--- PAGE 208 ---
10 Runs per Week (appropriate for 60–100 miles per week)
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday ThursdayFriday Saturday
Long
Run
AM: Easy
Run + Hill
Sprints PM:
Easy Run
Hard
Run
AM:
Moderate
Run PM:
Easy Run
Easy Run Hard
Run
AM: Easy
Run PM:
Easy
Run
12 Runs per Week (appropriate for 80–120 miles per week)
Sunday Monday TuesdayWednesdayThursday Friday Saturday
Long
Run
AM: Easy
Run + Hill
Sprints PM:
Easy Run
Hard
Run
AM:
Moderate
Run PM:
Easy Run
AM: Easy
Run PM:
Easy Run
AM:
Hard
Run
PM:
Easy
Run
AM: Easy
Run PM:
Easy
Run
Not every week in your training plan will be typical. In the first few
weeks of training, you may need to ramp up to the running frequency
that you will then sustain through the remainder of the training cycle.
In planned recovery weeks, which should occur once every three or
four weeks, you may do one or two runs fewer than you do in your
typical week. And, of course, you will cancel, change, and shuffle
workouts as necessary as you progress through the training plan.
Our hypothetical marathon runner will follow the seven-runs-per-
week schedule presented above, except in the initial weeks of
--- PAGE 209 ---
training and scheduled recovery weeks, when he will run six times a
week.
Step 4: Divide Your Plan into Introductory, Fundamental,
and Sharpening Periods.
Training phases, or periods, as I call them, are not as sharply
delineated in my adaptive running system as they are in other
training systems, but I do not forego their use entirely. There is a
natural sequence of short-term training priorities that punctuate the
process of developing peak fitness, so it’s natural to divide the
training cycle into three relatively distinct periods, each focused on
one of these priorities.
The first priority is developing an initial foundation of aerobic
fitness and neuromuscular fitness that enables you to perform the
more challenging training of the later periods effectively and without
getting injured. The introductory period focuses on this priority. The
second training priority is to build ever more race-specific fitness
atop the twin foundation of basic aerobic fitness and neuromuscular
fitness established in the introductory period. The fundamental
period focuses on this second priority. The third and final training
priority is to achieve peak-level race-specific fitness with a handful of
very challenging race-specific workouts and rest up for your peak
race. The sharpening period focuses on this last training priority.
--- PAGE 210 ---
Before you make any other decisions about your training plan,
decide how much and how often you will run. © Alison Wade
The absolute and relative duration of each training period should
be based on your starting fitness level, the distance of your peak
race, and the total duration of your training plan. The higher your
initial fitness level, the shorter your peak race, and the shorter your
training plan, the shorter the introductory period may be. A mere two
weeks of introductory training may suffice for an already fit runner
starting a 12-week program culminating in a 5K peak race. If your
starting fitness level is well below your peak fitness level, your
introductory period should be longer—up to six weeks. Runners
training for longer races are most likely to start at an initial fitness
level that is far below their desired peak level, so the optimal
introductory-period duration is almost always in the four-to-six-week
range when the peak race is a half-marathon or a marathon.
--- PAGE 211 ---
The sharpening period should be four weeks long in almost every
training plan. Two to three of these four weeks are devoted to putting
the final edge on your race-specific fitness; the final one to two
weeks comprise a tapering period. No runner requires or can handle
more than a few weeks of true peak-level training, and no runner
requires more than two weeks of reduced-volume training to rest up
for a peak race.
The fundamental period is usually the longest training period
because it must achieve the most movement in a runner’s fitness. I
recommend that you devote at least six weeks to fundamental
training when preparing for a 5K or 10K peak race, and at least eight
weeks when training for a half-marathon or marathon. In the training
plans presented in chapter 12, the training-period breakdowns are
loosely as follows:
Duration of Phase (in Weeks)
Peak Race Introductory Fundamental Sharpening
5K 3 6 3
10K 4 6 4
Half-Marathon 6 6 4
Marathon 6 10 4
Our hypothetical marathon runner will use the same period
breakdown as the marathon training plans in chapter 12. He is
--- PAGE 212 ---
starting from a modest level of fitness. His training has been
consistent, but lacking in challenging workouts and far below the
volume level he will need to reach in the late fundamental period to
achieve his race goal. Therefore a 20-week plan including a longer,
six-week introductory period is appropriate.
Step 5: Plan Your Peak Training Week.
When you make a long car trip, you need to know the address of
your final destination before you can decide whether you should turn
left or right at the end of your driveway. Likewise, when you are
designing a training plan, you need to plan your peak week of
training—the hardest week of training that immediately precedes
your pre-race taper—before you can schedule appropriate training
for the first week of the plan, the second week, and so forth. Your
peak week can be either the week before your race week or two
weeks before your race week. And by “peak week” I mean the week
with your hardest race-specific workouts, not necessarily your
highest mileage week.
Your peak week of training should feature three highly race-
specific workouts: a set of specific-endurance intervals or a race-
specific threshold workout on Tuesday, a race-specific threshold
workout or a set of specific-endurance intervals on Friday, and some
type of race-specific aerobic-support workout—a longer threshold
workout or a faster long run—on Sunday. Schedule the usual easy
run plus short hill sprints on Monday. The rest of the week is filler:
easy and moderate runs whose number and duration fit the
frequency and volume parameters you have set for your training
plan.
The specific format for the three key workouts in your peak week
of training will be determined by the distance of your peak race, your
race goal, your volume level (the higher your overall training volume,
the longer your peak workouts can be), and the guidelines for
--- PAGE 213 ---
aerobic training, muscle training, and specific-endurance training
presented in chapters 3 through 5.
Don’t worry about planning the perfect workouts for the peak
training week. As long as they closely simulate the challenges you
will face in your peak race in slightly different ways, your peak
workouts will do their job. In any case, like all other workouts, these
workouts are planned in pencil. You may and probably will revise
them at the 11th hour based on the state of your body entering your
peak training week.
Following are examples of peak training weeks for runners training
for four different race distances at four different mileage levels. All
distances have been rounded to the nearest mile. The last example
applies to our hypothetical 70-miles-per-week marathon runner for
whom we are designing a complete, 20-week training plan.
5K Peak Training Week—30 Miles
Sunday 6 miles moderate
2-mile hard progression @ 10K pace
Monday 2 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. steep hill sprint
Tuesday 1-mile warm-up
5 × 1K @ 5K pace with 90-sec. jog recoveries
1-mile cool-down
Wednesday 5 miles easy
Thursday Off
--- PAGE 214 ---
Friday 1-mile warm-up
4 miles @ 10K pace
1-mile cool-down
Saturday 5 miles easy
10K Peak Training Week—80 Miles
Workout 1 Workout
2
Sunday 2-mile warm-up
3 miles @ half-marathon pace
2 miles easy
3 miles @ half-marathon pace
2-mile cool-down
5 miles
easy
Monday 5 miles easy + 10 × 10-sec. steep hill sprint 5 miles
easy
Tuesday 2-mile warm-up
4 × 2K @ 10K pace + 1K maximum effort with 1-
minute jog recoveries
2-mile cool-down
5 miles
easy
Wednesday 5 miles easy + 2-mile moderate progression 5 miles
easy
Thursday 5 miles easy
--- PAGE 215 ---
Friday 1-mile warm-up
6 × 1 mile starting @ half-marathon pace, increasing
to 10K pace
1-mile cool-down
5 miles
easy
Saturday 8 miles easy + 2-mile hard progression
Half-Marathon Peak Training Week—45 Miles
Sunday 12 miles moderate
2-mile hard progression @ half-marathon pace
Monday 6 miles easy + 8 × 10-sec. steep hill sprint
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 2K @ 10K pace with 90-sec. jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
Wednesday 6 miles easy + 2-mile hard progression
Thursday Off
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 3K @ half-marathon pace with 90-sec. jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 7 miles easy
--- PAGE 216 ---
Marathon Peak Training Week—70 Miles
Sunday 10 miles moderate
10 miles @ marathon pace (6:00/mile)
Monday 6 miles easy + 10 × 10-sec. steep hill sprint
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 3K @ half-marathon pace with 90-sec. jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
Wednesday 8 miles easy + 2-mile hard progression (5:30/mile)
Thursday 6 miles easy
Friday 1-mile warm-up
3 miles @ half-marathon pace (5:45/mile)
1 mile easy
1 mile @ marathon pace
3 miles @ half-marathon pace
1-mile cool-down
Saturday 7 miles easy
Step 6: Schedule Tune-up Races and Recovery Weeks.
After planning your peak training week, you’ll want to incorporate
two non-workout elements into your training plan before you plot out
the majority of your workouts. Those two elements are tune-up races
--- PAGE 217 ---
and recovery weeks. It’s sensible to tackle them at the same time,
because tune-up races should be surrounded on both sides by at
least two days of easy training whenever possible, so that you’re
sufficiently rested to perform well in them.
A recovery week is a week of training in which the workload is
moderately reduced from the level of preceding weeks. The overall
structure of the weekly training cycle remains essentially unchanged.
Recovery weeks generally feature the same number, sequence, and
types of workouts as normal training weeks, but workouts are
shortened to achieve a 20-to 30-percent reduction in mileage.
Recovery weeks give the body an opportunity to fully adapt to recent
training and to prepare for a more challenging level of training in
subsequent weeks. Competitive runners who typically maintain a
workload that’s close to the limit of what their bodies can handle
require a recovery week every third week throughout the training
cycle. Runners who maintain a more easily managed workload
relative to their personal limits may only need a recovery week every
fourth week. Low-key, low-volume competitive runners typically don’t
need to schedule recovery weeks at all. Instead, they can just take a
day off or replace a hard run with an easy run as necessary.
If you consider the planned average training workload of your
training plan to be very near your limit, then schedule a 20-to 30-
percent mileage reduction every third week throughout the training
plan as a baseline. If your planned average training workload is more
moderate but still high enough that you anticipate needing the
occasional recovery week, then schedule a 20-to 30-percent mileage
reduction every fourth week throughout the training plan.
I encourage every runner to do at least one tune-up race
preceding his or her peak race. Tune-up races have several benefits.
First of all, they serve as key workouts that stimulate fitness gains
exceeding those you get from any regular workout. Tune-up races
also provide opportunities to achieve goals at race distances other
than that of your primary peak race. It’s not at all uncommon for a
--- PAGE 218 ---
runner to set a 5K PR while training for a 10K peak race, for
example, or to set a half-marathon PR several weeks before running
a marathon. Finally, tune-up races provide the best evidence of your
current fitness level.
If you’re starting at a modest level of fitness, try to get at least
eight solid weeks of training into your legs before toeing the line in a
tune-up race. Avoid racing too often, as well. If you’re racing on two
weekends of every month, you’re missing two Sunday long runs
every month and are probably too sore and fatigued to train
effectively on two Mondays and Tuesdays of every month. Shorter
races take the least out of you, so if you like to race often, do mostly
5K’s. Also, the shorter your peak race is, the more racing you can
get away with, as 5K and 10K tune-up races provide specific training
for 5K and 10K peak races. But if your peak race is a marathon,
you’ll get more benefit from a Sunday long run than from a 5K or 10K
tune-up race, except on special occasions.
As a general rule, tune-up races should be shorter or no longer
than your peak race. One exception is that a 10K is an acceptable
tune-up race for a 5K peak race. You can get away with racing a
half-marathon as a tune-up for a peak 10K, but you’ll most likely get
more out of another 10K.
A second general rule to follow in planning tune-up races is to do
shorter tune-up races before longer ones. Eight weeks into a
marathon training program, you’ll most likely not be in good enough
shape to run a decent half-marathon, but you might run a very strong
10K. It’s best to save the half-marathon until roughly four weeks
before your marathon.
Don’t go out of your way to pick tune-up races that just happen to
fall at the end of the recovery weeks you’ve scheduled for every third
or fourth week throughout your training plan. Just schedule the tune-
up races that make sense and adjust your recovery-week schedule
as necessary. For example, suppose you normally take a recovery
--- PAGE 219 ---
week every third week and you schedule a particular tune-up race
that falls on the second Sunday after the preceding recovery week.
In this case, it would make sense to train normally through
Wednesday of that tune-up race week. Move Friday’s key workout to
Thursday and possibly scale it back a bit. Then run easy on Friday
and run easy again or rest on Saturday. The following week, swap
Tuesday’s hard run with Wednesday’s easy run so you have two
solid recovery days after the tune-up race as well.
The following table shows a sensible schedule of tune-up races for
training plans matching the durations of those presented in chapter
12. Our hypothetical marathon runner will follow the marathon tune-
up race schedule shown here.
Peak Race: 5K 10K Half-
Marathon
Marathon
Plan
Duration:
12
weeks
14 weeks 16 weeks 20 weeks
Tune-Up
Races:
5K,
Week 9
5K, Week
8
10K,
Week 11
5K, Week
8
10K, Week
12
5K, Week 8
10K, Week 12 Half-marathon,
Week 16
Step 7: Schedule Progressions for Interval Workouts,
Threshold Workouts, and Long Runs.
The three “key workouts” that you do each week throughout an
adaptive running training cycle—typically, but not always, an interval
--- PAGE 220 ---
workout, a threshold run, and a long run—are the skeleton of your
training plan. They provide the structure that your fitness
development hangs on. Your other workouts merely “flesh out” the
plan, so to speak.
In a standard adaptive running training schedule, your key
workouts will fall on Tuesday, Friday, and Sunday. Your Tuesday and
Friday workouts will focus on developing specific endurance from a
foundation of aerobic support and neuromuscular fitness, primarily
through intervals and threshold training, while your Sunday workout
will usually be some type of long run. In chapters 3 through 5, I
provided guidelines that you can use to plan standard key-workout
progressions that are appropriate for each of the four popular road-
race distances. The ready-made training plans in chapter 12 provide
examples of standard key-workout progressions that are appropriate
to different training volumes at each of those four distances. Chapter
6 provided guidelines that you can use to customize your key-
workout progressions in ways that deviate from the standard, as
necessary.
Use all of this information to create key-workout progressions for
your entire training plan. To the degree that you feel unsure about
how to proceed, stick close to the key-workout progressions in the
ready-made training plan in chapter 12 that is most appropriate to
the plan you’re designing for yourself. But again, it’s not important
that each key workout be perfect in itself. As long as your three
weekly key workouts evolve generally in the direction of those you’ll
do in your peak training week, you’ll do fine. And again, you can
always modify individual key workouts as necessary as the plan
unfolds.
The following table presents a complete 20-week progression of
key workouts for our illustrative marathon runner.
--- PAGE 221 ---
Week Sunday Tuesday Friday
Introductory Period
1 8-mile easy run 6-mile easy run 6-mile easy run
2 10-mile easy run 6-mile easy run with 6
× 30-sec. fartlek
intervals @ 10K–3K
pace
5-mile easy run + 10-min.
progression @ half-
marathon pace (uphill, if
possible)
3 12-mile easy run 6-mile easy run with 8
× 30-sec. fartlek
intervals @ 10K–3K
pace
6-mile easy run + 10-min.
progression @ half-
marathon pace (uphill, if
possible)
4 8-mile easy run +
1.5 miles uphill @
goal marathon pace
7-mile easy run with 8
× 40-sec. fartlek
intervals @ 10K–3K
pace
5-mile easy run + 1.5-mile
progression @ half-
marathon pace (uphill, if
possible)
5 9-mile easy run + 2
miles uphill @ goal
marathon pace
7-mile easy run with 10
× 45-sec. fartlek
intervals @ 10K–3K
pace
5-mile easy run + 3-mile
progression @ half-
marathon pace (uphill, if
possible)
6 9-mile easy run 6-mile easy run with 6
× 30-sec. fartlek
intervals @ 10K–3K
pace
5-mile easy run + 1.5-mile
progression @ half-
marathon pace (uphill, if
possible)
Fundamental Period
7 12 miles easy + 15 min. @ goal 1.5-mile warm-up 1.5-mile warm-
--- PAGE 222 ---
marathon pace 6 × 800m @ 5K pace
w/400m jog
recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
up
2 × 1.5 miles @
10K pace
w/1-mile jog
recovery
1.5-mile cool-
down
8 5K tune-up race 1.5-mile warm-up
2 × (1 mile, 1K, 800m,
400m w/200m jog
recoveries) @ 10K–
1,500m pace
1.5-mile cool-down
(on Wednesday)
1.5-mile warm-
up
2 × 2 miles @
10K pace
w/1-mile jog
recovery
1.5-mile cool-
down
9 10 miles easy + 3 min. @ goal
marathon pace
1.5-mile warm-up
6 × 800m @ 5K pace
w/400m jog
recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
1.5-mile warm-
up
2 × 1 mile @
10K pace
w/1-mile jog
recovery
1.5-mile cool-
down
10 14 miles easy + 2 miles @ goal
marathon pace
1.5-mile warm-up
5 × 1K @ 5K pace
w/400m jog
recoveries
1.5-mile cool down
1.5-mile warm-
up
2 × 2.5 miles @
10K pace
w/1-mile jog
recovery 1.5-mile
cool-down
11 3 miles easy + 3 miles @ goal
marathon pace
1.5-mile warm-up
5 × 1 mile @ 10K
pace
1.5-mile warm-
up
3 miles @ half-
--- PAGE 223 ---
w/400m jog
recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
marathon pace
1 mile easy
2 miles @ 10K
pace
1.5-mile cool-
down
12 10K tune-up race 1.5-mile warm-up
3 miles @ 10K pace
1.5-mile cool-down
(on Wednesday)
1.5-mile warm-
up
2 miles @ half-
marathon pace
1 mile easy
2 miles @ 10K
pace
1.5-mile cool-
down
13 14 miles easy + 2.5 miles @
goal marathon pace
1.5-mile warm-up
3 × (1 mile, 1K, 800m,
400m w/200m jog
recoveries) @ 10K–
1,500m pace
1.5-mile cool-down
1.5-mile warm-
up
4 miles @ half-
marathon pace
1 mile easy
2 miles @ 10K
pace
1.5-mile cool-
down
14 5 miles easy + 5 × (1 mile @
marathon pace-15 sec. per
mile, 1 mile @ marathon pace
+ 1 min. per mile)
1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 2K @ 10K pace +
1K @ 5K–3K pace
1.5-mile warm-up
5 × 1 mile @ 10K
pace w/400m jog
recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
1.5-mile warm-
up
3 miles @ half-
marathon pace
1 mile easy
3 miles @ 10K
pace
1.5-mile cool-
down
--- PAGE 224 ---
15 13 miles easy + 1.5 miles @
goal marathon pace
5 × 1 mile @ 10K
pace
1.5-mile warm-
up
4 miles @ half-
marathon pace
1.5-mile cool-
down
16 Half-marathon tune-up race 1.5-mile warm-up
3 miles @ marathon
pace
1 mile easy
2 miles @ half-
marathon pace
1 mile easy
1 mile @ 10K pace
1.5-mile cool-down
(on Wednesday)
1.5-mile warm-
up
2 × 3 miles @
half-marathon
pace w/1-mile
jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-
down
Sharpening Period
17 6 miles easy + 4 × (2 miles @
marathon pace-5 sec. per mile, 1
mile @ marathon pace + 30 sec.
per mile)
1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 3K @ half-
marathon pace
w/2-min. jog
recoveries
1.5-mile cool-
down
1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 2 miles @ half-
marathon pace
w/2-min. jog
recoveries
1.5-mile cool-
down
18 10 miles moderate
10 miles @ marathon pace
(6:00/mile)
1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 3K @ half-
marathon pace
w/90-sec. jog
recoveries
1.5-mile cool-
down
1.5-mile warm-up
5 miles @ half-
marathon pace
1.5-mile cool-
down
19 17 miles easy 1.5-mile warm-up 1-mile warm-up
--- PAGE 225 ---
3 × 3K @ half-
marathon pace
w/300m jog
recoveries
1.5-mile cool-
down
3 miles @ half-
marathon pace
1 mile easy
1 mile @
marathon pace
3 miles @ half-
marathon pace
1-mile cool-down
20 12 miles easy + 3 miles @ goal
marathon pace
1.5-mile warm-up
2 × 3K @ half-
marathon pace
w/300m jog
recoveries
1.5-mile cool-
down
1-mile warm-up
1 mile @
marathon pace
1 mile @ half-
marathon pace
1-mile cool-down
Step 8: Fill in the Remainder of the Schedule.
The final step of the training-plan design process is to fill in the
remainder of your training schedule with easy runs, moderate runs,
steep hill sprints, strides, and drills. The volume of “filler” running
should increase sensibly in the introductory period, starting at a level
you can comfortably manage and building at a manageable rate
toward the level you will sustain fairly consistently throughout the
fundamental period.
In a standard adaptive running plan, steep hill sprints are
introduced very cautiously (just one sprint per session) twice per
week in week 2. Add one to two sprints per session per week until
you reach the maximal level you’re comfortable with and then cut
back to one session per week. Replace the eliminated hill-sprint
session with strides. Also, do strides and drills as part of your warm-
up prior to any workout involving efforts at 10K pace or faster.
--- PAGE 226 ---
As you execute your training plan, just run the distance that feels
right whenever an easy run is scheduled. The purpose of plotting
specific distance numbers for easy and moderate runs in your
training plan is not to lock yourself into running exactly the scheduled
number of miles in each of them but rather to control your total
weekly running volume appropriately.
Here is the complete, filled-in 20-week marathon-training plan for
our invented runner.
20-Week Marathon Training Plan
Average Run Frequency: 7 days
Peak Volume: 70 miles/week
Introductory Period
Week 1
Sunday 8 miles easy
Monday Off
Tuesday 6 miles easy
Wednesday 5 miles easy
Thursday 5 miles easy
--- PAGE 227 ---
Friday 6 miles easy
Saturday 5 miles easy
Total miles: 35
Week 2
Sunday 10 miles easy
Monday 4 miles easy + 1 × 8-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 6 miles easy w/6 × 30-sec. fartlek intervals @ 10K–3K pace
Wednesday 5 miles easy + 1-mile moderate progression
Thursday 4 miles easy + 1 × 8-sec. hill sprint
Friday 5 miles easy + 10-min. progression @ half-marathon pace
(uphill, if possible)
Saturday 6 miles easy
Total miles:
42
--- PAGE 228 ---
Week 3
Sunday 12 miles easy
Monday 5 miles easy + 2 × 8-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 6 miles easy w/8 × 30-sec. fartlek intervals @ 10K–3K pace
Wednesday 5 miles easy + 1-mile moderate progression
Thursday 5 miles easy + 2 × 8-sec. hill sprint
Friday 6 miles easy + 10-min. progression @ half-marathon pace
(uphill, if possible)
Saturday 6 miles easy
Total miles:
48
Week 4
Sunday 8 miles easy + 1.5 miles uphill @ goal marathon pace
Monday 6 miles easy + 4 × 8-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 7 miles easy w/8 × 40-sec. fartlek intervals @ 10K–3K pace
--- PAGE 229 ---
Wednesday 7 miles easy + 1-mile moderate progression
Thursday 5 miles easy + 4 × 8-sec. hill sprint
Friday 6 miles easy + 1.5-mile progression @ half-marathon pace
(uphill, if possible)
Saturday 6 miles easy
Total miles:
49
Week 5
Sunday 9 miles easy + 2 miles uphill @ goal marathon pace
Monday 6 miles easy + 5 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 7 miles easy w/10 × 45-sec. fartlek intervals @ 10K–3K pace
Wednesday 7 miles easy + 1-mile moderate progression
Thursday 5 miles easy + 5 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Friday 5 miles easy + 3-mile progression @ half-marathon pace
(uphill, if possible)
--- PAGE 230 ---
Saturday 8 miles easy
Total miles:
53
Week 6 (Recovery Week)
Sunday 9 miles easy
Monday Off
Tuesday 6 miles easy w/6 × 30-sec. fartlek intervals @ 10K–3K pace
Wednesday 7 miles easy + 1-mile moderate progression
Thursday 6 miles easy + 4 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Friday 6 miles easy + 1.5-mile progression @ half-marathon pace
(uphill, if possible)
Saturday 6 miles easy
Total miles:
43
--- PAGE 231 ---
Fundamental Period
Week 7
Sunday 12 miles easy + 2 miles @ goal marathon pace
Monday 6 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
6 × 800m @ 5K pace w/400m jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
Wednesday 6 miles easy + 2-mile moderate progression
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
2 × 1.5 miles @ 10K pace w/1-mile jog recovery
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 8 miles easy
Total miles: 57
Week 8
Sunday 5K tune-up race
(2-mile warm-up, 1-mile cool-down)
--- PAGE 232 ---
Monday 6 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 7 miles easy + 2-mile moderate progression
Wednesday 1.5-mile warm-up
2 ×(1 mile, 1K, 800m, 400m w/200m jog recoveries) @ 10K–
1,500m pace
1.5-mile cool-down
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
2 × 2 miles @ 10K pace w/1-mile jog recovery
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 8 miles easy
Total miles:
52
Week 9 (Recovery Week)
Sunday 10 miles easy + 3 min. @ goal marathon pace
Monday Off
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
--- PAGE 233 ---
6 × 800m @ 5K pace w/400m jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool down
Wednesday 6 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
2 × 1 mile @ 10K pace w/1-mile jog recovery
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 6 miles easy
Total miles: 42
Week 10
Sunday 14 miles easy + 2 miles @ goal marathon pace
Monday 6 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
5 × 1K @ 5K pace w/400m jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool down
Wednesday 6 miles easy + 2-mile moderate progression
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
--- PAGE 234 ---
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
2 × 2.5 miles @ 10K pace w/1-mile jog recovery
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 10 miles easy
Total miles: 63
Week 11
Sunday 13 miles easy + 3 miles @ goal marathon pace
Monday 6 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
5 × 1 mile @ 10K pace w/400m jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
Wednesday 6 miles easy + 2-mile hard progression
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
3 miles @ half-marathon pace
1 mile easy
2 miles @ 10K pace
1.5-mile cool-down
--- PAGE 235 ---
Saturday 10 miles easy
Total miles: 65
Week 12 (Recovery Week)
Sunday 2-mile warm-up
10K tune-up race
1-mile cool-down
Monday Off
Tuesday 6 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Wednesday 1.5-mile warm-up
3 miles @ 10K pace
1.5-mile cool-down
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
2 miles @ half-marathon pace
1 mile easy
2 miles @ 10K pace
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 8 miles easy
Total miles: 44
--- PAGE 236 ---
Week 13
Sunday 14 miles easy + 2.5 miles @ goal marathon pace
Monday 6 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
3 ×(1 mile, 1K, 800m, 400m w/200m jog recoveries) @ 10K–
1,500m pace
1.5-mile cool-down
Wednesday 6 miles easy + 2-mile moderate progression
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
4 miles @ half-marathon pace
1 mile easy
2 miles @ 10K pace
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 8 miles easy
Total miles:
66
Week 14
--- PAGE 237 ---
Sunday 5 miles easy + 5 ×(1 mile @ marathon pace-15 sec. per mile, 1
mile @ marathon pace + 1 min. per mile)
Monday 6 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 2K @ 10K pace + 1K @ 5K–3K pace
1.5-mile cool-down
Wednesday 6 miles easy + 2-mile hard progression
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
3 miles @ half-marathon pace
1 mile easy
3 miles @ 10K pace
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 10 miles easy
Total miles:
66
Week 15 (Recovery Week)
Sunday 13 miles easy +1.5 miles @ goal marathon pace
--- PAGE 238 ---
Monday 6 miles easy +6 ×10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
5 ×1 mile @ 10K pace w/400m jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
Wednesday 6 miles easy +2-mile hard progression
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
4 miles @ half-marathon pace
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 8 miles easy
Total miles: 59
Week 16
Sunday 1.5-mile warm-up
Half-marathon tune-up race
1-mile cool-down
Monday 6 miles easy +6 ×10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 6 miles easy +2-mile hard progression
--- PAGE 239 ---
Wednesday 1.5-mile warm-up
3 miles @ marathon pace
1 mile easy
2 miles @ half-marathon pace
1 mile easy
1 mile @ 10K pace
1.5-mile cool-down
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
2 ×3 miles @ half-marathon pace w/1-mile jog recovery
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 11 miles easy
Total miles: 68
Sharpening Period
Week 17
Sunday 8 miles easy + 4 ×(2 miles @ marathon pace-5 sec. per mile, 1
mile @ marathon pace + 30 sec. per mile)
Monday 6 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 3K @ half-marathon pace w/2-min. jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
--- PAGE 240 ---
Wednesday 6 miles easy + 2-mile hard progression
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 2 miles @ half-marathon pace w/400m jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 7 miles easy
Total miles:
71
Week 18
Sunday 10 miles moderate
10 miles @ marathon pace (6:00/mile)
Monday 6 miles easy + 6 × 10-sec. hill sprint
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
4 × 3K @ half-marathon pace w/300m jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
Wednesday 6 miles easy + 3-mile moderate progression
Thursday 6 miles easy +drills and strides
--- PAGE 241 ---
Friday 1.5-mile warm-up
2 × 3 miles @ half-marathon pace w/1-mile jog recovery
1.5-mile cool-down
Saturday 8 miles easy
Total miles: 71
Week 19 (Taper Week)
Sunday 17 miles easy
Monday Off
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
3 × 3K @ half-marathon pace w/300m jog recoveries
1.5-mile cool-down
Wednesday 5 miles easy + 1-mile moderate progression
Thursday 4 miles easy +drills and strides
Friday 1-mile warm-up
3 miles @ half-marathon pace (5:45/mile)
1 mile easy
1 mile @ marathon pace
3 miles @ half-marathon pace
1-mile cool-down
--- PAGE 242 ---
Saturday 4 miles easy
Total miles: 50
Week 20 (Taper Week)
Sunday 12 miles easy + 3 miles @ goal marathon pace
Monday Off
Tuesday 1.5-mile warm-up
2 × 3K @ half-marathon pace w/300m jog recovery
1.5-mile cool-down
Wednesday 4 miles easy + 1-mile hard progression
Thursday 4 miles easy
Friday 1-mile warm-up
1 mile @ marathon pace
1 mile @ half-marathon pace
1-mile cool-down
Saturday 2 miles easy
Total miles: 37
Sunday Marathon goal race in 2:39
--- PAGE 243 ---
James Carney © Alison Wade
Runner Profile: James Carney
My work with James Carney exemplifies how adjusting your
training for a better custom fit can lead to rapid improvement in
racing, even if you’re already an experienced and highly trained
runner. James was indeed experienced and highly trained when he
joined my team in the winter of 2007. He was 26 years old with four
years of experience on an elite running team coached by Bob
Sevene in California and four years of college running experience
before that. His personal best times of 13:47 for 5,000 meters and
28:27 for 10,000 meters were slower than those of the other male
runners on my team, but I felt he had the potential to improve
substantially.
--- PAGE 244 ---
I had no idea just how quickly he would improve, however. James
responded extremely well to the new training approach he
experienced with me. His past training was more conventional in
certain ways, with long blocks of training that focused on just one or
two types of training, and especially long blocks of mostly moderate-
intensity aerobic work. My adaptive running system emphasizes
diverse and varied workouts throughout the training process, and
that’s exactly what James got when he moved to Boulder. I
introduced challenging threshold work into his regimen at the very
beginning, as well as steep hill sprints, which he had never done
before. In addition, I increased the amount of specific-endurance
training in his program while slightly reducing his volume of aerobic
work, because he had already developed a strong aerobic system.
James’s first race as part of my team was the 2007 USA National
Cross-Country Championships, held only nine weeks after I gave
him his first adaptive running workout. He had a breakthrough
performance, finishing seventh, qualifying for the World
Championships, and defeating several big-name runners he had
never even come close to beating before. Two months later, James
achieved an even greater breakthrough, lowering his 10,000-meter
personal best to 27:43 and establishing himself among the first rank
of American runners.
Few experiences have done more to boost my confidence that I
am a pretty good coach than my first few months of working with
James Carney.
--- PAGE 245 ---
Training Execution 8
         
One of the best ways to ensure that your next training cycle ends in
disaster is to stubbornly endeavor to complete every workout in your
training plan exactly as designed, no matter what. In the most likely
scenario, early in the training process you’ll develop a sore spot in
your knee, shin, or elsewhere that becomes more and more painful
because you refuse to heed the warning and you continue doing all
of your scheduled workouts. After another week or two, the sore spot
will have developed into a full-blown overuse injury that renders you
completely unable to continue training.
In the only other likely scenario, sooner or later you will push
through a hard workout that’s scheduled on a day when you happen
to be unexpectedly fatigued from previous training, and as a result,
instead of making you stronger, the workout will thrust you deeper
into a hole of fatigue that leaves you in an even worse state when it
comes time to do your next hard workout. After another week or two
of persisting in this manner, you’ll find yourself feeling exhausted in
every single workout, and perhaps even between workouts. Your
fitness will plateau and then begin a downward spiral, despite (or
rather, due to) the fact that your training workload continues to
--- PAGE 246 ---
increase. In a matter of time you will wind up sick or injured and
completely unable to continue training.
A training plan is just that: a plan. It is not a set of laws,
commandments, or marching orders that you must live and die by
and never deviate from. Your training plan represents an ideal
scenario: the sequence of workouts that you hope to be able to
perform if everything goes as expected. But things do not always go
as expected in the execution of a training plan. Somewhere along
the journey you are certain to experience at least one and probably
many more than one period of poor recovery or substandard
performance, a trouble spot in your body, an illness or nutrition-
related problem, or an unanticipated course of development such as
lagging neuromuscular fitness or signs that you are approaching a
fitness peak too early. When such things happen, you must depart
from the course of workouts laid out in your training plan to stay on
course toward your peak-race goal.
Within the past year, I’ve had to make such adjustments in the
training of every athlete I coach. In the early spring, Dathan
Ritzenhein developed a stress reaction in his foot while performing a
speed workout on the track. Dathan has a history of stress fractures,
so I took aggressive action and had him cease all land running and
instead do all of his workouts on an anti-gravity treadmill that
enabled him to run on as little as 65 percent of his body weight, pain-
free. When he returned to land running, we found that he had lost
very little fitness, so we picked up his preparations for the summer
track season right where we had left off, but pushed back his first
race by a couple of weeks.
Also within the past year, middle-distance runner Jo Ankier of
Great Britain overtrained over the winter and became run-down. Her
workout and race performances slipped, and she just felt generally
lousy. I responded by adding more rest and recovery days to her
schedule, removing much of the “filler” from her training, and
--- PAGE 247 ---
concentrating her hard work in just a couple of workouts each week.
She rebounded quickly and was racing well again by April.
I could give you other examples involving Ed Torres, Jason
Hartmann, and my other athletes, but I trust my point has been
made. It pays to train responsively, modifying your planned training
in small ways or big ways as necessary, based on what happens
over the course of the training process. Many competitive runners
resist such deviations, either because they assume that to give up
on planned training is to give up on achieving their peak-race goal,
or because they simply don’t know how to stray from the course of
their planned training to stay on course toward their goal. Making
training adjustments on the fly is easier for runners who have a
coach they trust. Self-coached runners like you must develop the
openness and knowledge to steer your own training in response to
what happens as the process unfolds.
To achieve your best performance in a peak race, two things are
required: a solid training plan and successful training execution.
Successful training execution is a matter of deviating from your plan
in appropriate ways as necessary from the first day of training to the
last. This doesn’t mean that your training plan goes out the window
the moment you put it into action. To the contrary, as you proceed
through the training cycle, you will complete each and every workout
as prescribed in your training plan unless you have a good reason to
do otherwise. Good reasons to deviate from scheduled workouts
range from residual fatigue and soreness from previous workouts to
feeling that your body requires or will benefit more from a different
sort of training stimulus than the one that the prescribed workout
would provide. Relying on your training plan without over-relying on it
in this manner will give you the best chance of running to your full
potential in your peak race.
There are three levels of training adjustments that you must be
open to and confident in making to get the best results from a
training cycle: single-workout adjustments, multi-workout
--- PAGE 248 ---
adjustments, and adjustments affecting the remainder of a training
cycle.
Single-Workout Adjustments
The first requirement for successful training execution is listening
to your body every day. Listening to your body means paying
attention to how your body feels during and between workouts and
adjusting your running accordingly. Plan A is always to do your
originally scheduled workouts, of course, but you should always be
ready and willing to move to plan B or C, if necessary, and in most
cases you should not be at all worried when you do find it necessary
to scrap today’s plan A.
On days when you have a hard workout planned, scan your body
for any signals that it’s not prepared for the workout. If you feel
especially fatigued and/or sore in the hours preceding a planned
hard workout, consider replacing it with an easier workout or, in
extreme cases, taking the day off. It’s often difficult, however, to
accurately predict how you’ll feel and perform during a workout
based on how you feel in the hours preceding it. Therefore I
recommend that, except in those cases where you’re certain that you
need to cancel or modify a planned hard workout, you at least start
the planned workout regardless of how you feel and then simply cut
it short if you find that you feel lousy and are unable to perform
adequately.
The only factor that I have found to be a reasonably accurate
predictor of readiness for a hard workout 24 hours later is
performance in steep hill sprints. That’s one reason my standard
adaptive running training week places them on Mondays and
sometimes also on Thursdays—in each case, one day before a hard
threshold or interval workout. If you lack power and feel drained and
flat when performing a set of hill sprints, it is at least somewhat likely
that you will perform poorly in any type of hard workout you try to do
--- PAGE 249 ---
the following day. The reason hill sprints are an especially good
indicator of readiness for hard training is that they place a high
demand on the neuromuscular system and thereby reveal underlying
nervous-system fatigue that you might not notice otherwise.
An Australian study found that a five-jump broad-jump test was a
very reliable indicator of inability to perform at normal levels in a 3K
running time trial for a group of triathletes subjected to a period of
especially hard training. A five-jump broad-jump test challenges the
neuromuscular system in a way that is similar to the way steep hill
sprints do. I have found that hill sprints are not equally reliable as a
recovery-status indicator for all runners, however, so pay attention to
how you tend to perform in hard workouts undertaken the day after a
substandard hill-sprint session before you begin using them to make
anticipatory training adjustments.
Unless you get sick or develop an outright injury, always try to get
at least a small training stimulus of the special kinds called for each
day in the standard adaptive running training week (or your custom-
modified version thereof). Here, once more, is the basic adaptive
running weekly template for special training stimuli:
Plan A, again, is always to perform the exact session that you
scheduled for yourself when designing your training plan. Plan B,
when you feel lousy, is to perform a shortened version of the same
session. For example, instead of 30 minutes of threshold running
you might do only 15 minutes and call it a day. Typically, this
approach is better than postponing a planned workout until the next
day, because then you may have to postpone the next planned hard
workout, and so forth. In other words, there’s a domino effect. So
--- PAGE 250 ---
when your body tells you that it isn’t prepared to handle even a
shortened version of a planned hard workout, go ahead and cancel it
(plan C) instead of postponing it and hope to feel stronger when it’s
time for your next hard workout.
Up to this point, we’ve talked about replacing planned hard training
with easier training or rest when you feel unexpectedly bad. But does
it also work the other way? Should you replace easy runs with hard
workouts when you feel unexpectedly strong? Generally, I do not
advise that you spontaneously replace planned easy runs with hard
workouts on those days when you feel especially strong. Just enjoy
the feeling and perhaps add a short, fast progression (say, 10
minutes of “hard” running) onto the end of the run to indulge your
body’s urge to pour on the gas. By conserving your strength in this
manner, you’ll increase the chances that you feel strong again when
it comes time to do your next hard workout, when running hard and
well will provide more benefit.
It’s okay to make the occasional exception to this rule when you’re
confident that it’s the right move. For example, suppose you’re
training for a marathon. Tomorrow you have a 12-mile long run with a
1-mile moderate progression scheduled. Last week you did a 10-mile
long run with a 1-mile progression and you felt surprisingly strong at
the end. Normally you increase the distance of your long runs very
gradually, because past experience has taught you that your
endurance builds slowly. But you have a feeling that you now have
an opportunity to be a little more aggressive—that you could handle
a 13-miler with a 1.5-mile progression tomorrow. Even if you return
to a more conservative long-run build-up in subsequent weeks,
taking advantage of this opportunity will put your endurance
development slightly ahead of schedule, so you decide to give it a
try. You can always make the decision to return to plan A during the
workout if you don’t feel as strong as you expected.
In most cases, however, when you feel especially strong in a
planned hard workout, the proper way to take advantage of the
--- PAGE 251 ---
situation is not to lengthen the workout but simply to run a little faster
than normal. But in doing this, stay true to the intended intensity
level(s) called for. If, for example, a workout calls for 5K of threshold
running at your current 10K pace, don’t turn the workout into a 5K
time trial just because you feel great. Instead, take pleasure in the
discovery that your current 10K pace is a bit faster than anticipated
and run the 5K threshold segment at your true, revised current 10K
race pace.
It doesn’t pay to “get greedy” in your training. In a well-designed
training plan, you’ll have opportunities to run to the point of
significant fatigue. It’s best to save these efforts for their appointed
times. If it should turn out that your entire training plan is
unexpectedly easy, make your next training plan more challenging,
but don’t risk spoiling the current one by getting too aggressive.
Multi-Workout Adjustments
Another way of listening to your body that is critical to effective
training execution involves continuously paying attention to how your
body is adapting to your training throughout the cycle. The main
objective of doing this is to assess whether your fitness development
is on track and on schedule to reach the level of race-specific fitness
that you’ll need to attain your peak-race goal, and to determine
precisely how you are off track or off schedule, if indeed you are.
Typically, the discovery that your fitness development is off track
requires that you adjust more than one scheduled workout.
In order to know whether your fitness is on track or off track, you
must remain mindful of the final destination of your training, which is
specific endurance for your peak-race goal; in other words, the
capacity to cover the full peak-race distance at your goal pace. This
destination is represented in the peak training week that you laid out
when designing your training plan. You must be able to perform as
expected in the highly challenging and race-specific workouts
--- PAGE 252 ---
contained in this peak week of training to achieve your peak-race
goal. So your peak training week is the nearest thing to an
unchangeable, etched-in-stone decree in the whole adaptive running
system. If you have to change it substantially, you probably have to
change your goal. (I’ll come back to this topic later in the chapter.)
If your lungs feel strong but your legs feel weak in speed
workouts, your neuromuscular fitness may be lagging. © Alison
Wade
The workouts that you scheduled for the weeks preceding your
peak training week represent the training progression that, based on
your knowledge and experience, will do the best job of developing
your fitness step by step from the level it’s at when you start training
to the desired peak level. As you execute the training plan, however,
you’ll inevitably find that you were slightly wrong—that your body
doesn’t respond to the training progression exactly as you had
expected it to. Adjusting your planned workouts sensibly over the
--- PAGE 253 ---
course of executing your training will increase the odds that you are
able to complete your peak training week more or less as planned
and achieve your peak-race goal.
There are essentially three ways in which your fitness can fail to
measure up to the expectations you had when you designed your
training plan. Your aerobic fitness, your neuromuscular fitness, or
your specific endurance could lag too far behind the other two
components of your running fitness. The following table provides a
concise summary of signs that your fitness is possibly off track in
one of these three ways.
Throughout the training process, closely monitor your fitness
development by looking for the following signs that your
neuromuscular fitness, your aerobic fitness, or your specific
endurance might not be where it should be.
Table 8.1 Signs that Your Fitness Might Be Off Track
Signs that your
neuromuscular fitness is
lagging
• You feel sluggish in your speed workouts
• You fell weak when running uphill
• In threshold runs, your breathing is under
control but your legs feel heavy
Sign that your aerobic
fitness is lagging
• You fatigue faster than you feel you should
during long runs
• You feel fast in speed-interval workouts, but
you fatigue after just a few intervals
• In threshold workouts, your legs seem to want
to go faster than your lungs can handle
--- PAGE 254 ---
Signs that your specific
endurance is lagging
• You have trouble sustaining your goal race
pace in specific endurance workouts
• You fatigue faster than you should in specific
endurance workouts
• You don’t perform as well as expected in a
spec test
• You perform poorly in a tune-up race
Experiencing one of the signs identified in table 8.1 does not
automatically indicate that your training is flawed and should be
adjusted. You cannot expect to perform well in every workout, nor
can you expect your neuromuscular fitness, aerobic fitness, and
specific endurance to always be on the same level throughout the
training process. For example, if you are naturally a speed runner,
and your muscular system is stronger than your aerobic system, it
will be normal for you to feel that your lungs rather than your legs are
limiting your performance in threshold workouts. Presumably, if you
are such a runner, you designed a training program that accounts for
your strengths and weaknesses using the guidelines presented in
chapter 6.
My purpose in encouraging you to watch out for signs of possible
flaws in your fitness development is not to have you hit the proverbial
panic button and overhaul your training every time you observe such
a sign, like a bad investor who watches the stock market too closely
and moves his money around too often instead of taking the long
view. When monitoring your fitness development, you need to keep a
sense of perspective that helps you brush off certain signs as
nothing to worry about and react only to those signs that demand a
response. Understanding the final destination of your training and
keeping it always in mind will enable you to maintain the perspective
--- PAGE 255 ---
needed to accurately judge whether your fitness is truly off track to
the degree that requires a multi-workout adjustment.
This process is really a matter of developing and acting on
hunches. It’s impossible to formulate a strict set of rules to apply in
the process of considering possible adjustments to planned
workouts. You have to go by a sense of feel or intuition that is
informed by your knowledge of adaptive running and of yourself as a
runner. In any case, it’s not something you need to worry too much
about, because the training adjustments you’ll make in response to
this type of diagnosis are not drastic.
The guiding principle for multi-workout adjustments is simple: If
your neuromuscular fitness is lagging, add more muscle training to
your next two or three weeks of training, while possibly also slightly
reducing your aerobic-support and/or specific-endurance training. If
your aerobic fitness is lagging, add more aerobic-support training to
your next two or three weeks of training, while possibly also slightly
reducing your muscle and/or specific-endurance training. And if your
specific endurance is lagging, add more specific-endurance training
to your next two or three weeks of training, while possibly also
slightly reducing your muscle and/or aerobic-support training. After
executing your adjusted workouts, reassess your fitness balance and
then decide whether to continue with this altered balance of training
types or revert back to your training plan.
To give you a feeling for how to make these multi-workout
adjustments, I’ll present three sample scenarios. In scenario #1, a
runner who’s currently in the fundamental period of training for a 10K
peak race decides that her neuromuscular fitness is lagging and
adjusts her next three weeks of training to provide more muscle-
training stimulus. In scenario #2, the same runner decides that her
aerobic fitness is lagging and adjusts her next three weeks of
training to provide more aerobic stimulus. And in scenario #3, the
same runner decides that her specific endurance is lagging and
adjusts her next three weeks of training to provide more specific-
--- PAGE 256 ---
endurance stimulus. First I’ll present the originally planned next three
weeks of training. The three alternative scenarios then follow.
Planned Training
This three-week training progression represents the training that
our hypothetical 10K runner had originally planned to do before an
assessment of her fitness development led her to conclude that one
component was lagging, necessitating a multi-workout adjustment.
Scenario #1
--- PAGE 257 ---
In this scenario, the originally planned three-week training
progression has been modified to provide slightly more muscle-
training stimulus, based on the runner’s assessment that her
neuromuscular fitness is lagging. (Modified workouts appear in
boldface.)
The extra muscle work has been added primarily to Tuesday’s
workouts, which were focused on threshold efforts in the original
schedule. The amount of threshold work in these workouts has been
reduced to “make room” for this muscle work and avoid overtraining.
To compensate, Sunday’s long-run progressions have been changed
from moderate (normally a little faster than marathon pace) to hard
(roughly half-marathon pace). This prevents the runner from losing
momentum in the development of her aerobic support in the process
of accelerating the development of her neuromuscular fitness.

--- PAGE 258 ---
Scenario #2
In this scenario, the originally planned three-week training
progression has been modified to provide slightly more aerobic-
support training stimulus, based on the runner’s assessment that her
aerobic fitness is lagging. (Modified workouts appear in boldface.)
Only a very slight amount of volume is added to the schedule—to
minimize the risk of overtraining—but it should suffice to measurably
accelerate the runner’s aerobic-support development nonetheless.
Adding a mile or two to each Sunday long run will make these
workouts more fatiguing, thereby stimulating greater aerobic
adaptations. Adding progressively longer progressions to the end of
Wednesday’s easy runs will give the runner additional time at the
upper end of her aerobic intensity zone. There is no need to reduce
muscle training or specific-endurance training in this scenario.
--- PAGE 259 ---
Scenario #3
In this scenario, the originally planned three-week training
progression has been modified to provide slightly more specific-
endurance training stimulus, based on the runner’s assessment that
her specific endurance is lagging. (Modified workouts appear in
boldface.)
In the first week, the original threshold workout is replaced with a
set of specific-endurance intervals. Sunday’s long run is shortened
and the progression is replaced with a threshold effort to
compensate for the change in Tuesday’s workout without increasing
the week’s overall training workload and thus risking overtraining. In
the second week, the only change is to Sunday’s run, in which the
progression is replaced with a 1.5-mile race-specific effort performed
--- PAGE 260 ---
in a prefatigued state. With a solid specific-endurance interval
workout also scheduled for Friday, this one change is sufficient. In
the third week, Sunday’s long run is shortened and fartlek intervals
at 10K pace are added to it. Tuesday’s threshold workout is tweaked
just a bit to make it a little more race-specific.
In this scenario, overall (aerobic) training volume is modestly
scaled back to accommodate additional specific-endurance work.
The result will be a boost in specific endurance without risk of
overtraining or loss of neuromuscular or aerobic fitness.
It is possible for two or three components of your running fitness to
lag simultaneously. Such a general lag in fitness development is
--- PAGE 261 ---
usually a sign that you are overtraining and requires a different sort
of multi-workout adjustment. Specifically, it requires that you take a
few easy days and/or rest days and then resume normal training at a
slightly reduced workload compared to your original plan.
Adjustments Affecting the Remainder of a Training Cycle
Major setbacks such as injuries and illnesses may require
adjustments that affect the remainder of the training cycle, and
perhaps also your peak-race goal. In most cases, a typical overuse
injury need not have a drastic effect on your training and peak-race
goal. It is usually possible to prevent the injury from becoming
serious by immediately ceasing to run as soon as pain raises a red
flag and to maintain fitness by cross-training while the injury heals
and then make a fairly smooth return to training after a few days, or
a few weeks at most. But an illness such as a 10-day flu will render
you unable to do any training whatsoever and will probably
necessitate a slow and cautious return to training even after its
symptoms have disappeared.
Anytime you miss more than five days of training due to illness or
any other cause, adjust your future training in the following manner:
In your first two or three days back on the roads, run by feel and run
cautiously. Start at an easy pace and run only as long as you feel
comfortable. If you feel good, speed up and run farther, but don’t go
overboard. On your third or fourth day back, perform a challenging
specific-endurance workout to assess how much fitness you’ve lost.
If you find that you’ve lost little fitness, then work toward resuming
your normal training—not immediately, but gradually over the next 10
days or so. If you find that you’ve lost substantial fitness, scrap your
original training plan and create a new one that takes your fitness
from its present level to the highest level possible in the time
available before your peak race. Also, create a new peak-race goal
that is commensurate to the level of fitness you can reasonably
expect to achieve in the time remaining.
--- PAGE 262 ---
Canceling a peak race is a difficult decision to make, but
sometimes it’s the right one. If the best peak-race performance you
can hope to achieve after missing some training is so far below the
level you had hoped to achieve that it just doesn’t seem worth the
effort, then it’s probably not worth the effort. Find a new peak race to
aim for that’s at least a few weeks later and start a new training cycle
to prepare for it.
Training Through Injuries
Professional runners have become much smarter about avoiding
and overcoming injuries than they were in my days on the circuit.
The professional runners of my generation tried too often to push
through injuries, which usually resulted in making them worse. The
only other alternative, it seemed to us, was to take time off and lose
fitness voluntarily. Only a few smart runners aggressively pursued
cross-training as a compromise between trying to continue running
as normal despite injury pain and taking time off. Those who did
were more often able to reach the starting line of important races in
one piece and ready to perform at a high level. Since racing is a
professional runner’s livelihood, cross-training as a means of
“salvaging” a training cycle affected by injury started to catch on.
These days, most elite runners in the United States rely on cross-
training to maintain fitness while an injury heals—and to prevent
injuries from becoming severe in the first place.
The Dathan Ritzenhein example I shared at the beginning of the
chapter is typical. The foot problem he experienced during his spring
ramp-up for the summer track season easily could have ruined his
racing plans had he tried to push through it, or even if he had
responded to it by ceasing to exercise completely. But by
immediately ceasing his land running and training just as hard on an
anti-gravity treadmill for four weeks, Dathan was able to stay fit and
heal, and as a result his foot injury turned out to be only a minor
setback.
--- PAGE 263 ---
You probably don’t have access to an anti-gravity treadmill, but
you can train through injuries in more or less the same way using
cross-training options such as bicycling, inline skating, and elliptical
training. Whenever you experience pain in a bone, muscle, or joint
that affects your running, immediately stop running and transfer your
workouts to your preferred cross-training activity until you’re able to
run pain-free again. Try to keep the frequency, duration, and intensity
of workouts the same in your cross-training activity as they would
have been if you hadn’t gotten injured and had continued to follow
your training plan.
Resist any temptation to resume running before the injury has fully
healed. When you’re fairly confident that the injury has healed, do
one or two more cross-training workouts for good measure and then
do a test run. If this workout goes well, you may then return to
following your training plan.
Most competitive runners do not particularly enjoy cross-training.
Dathan nearly went insane with boredom when running as many as
130 miles a week on that space-age treadmill. But the surest way to
minimize the time you have to spend cross-training instead of
running (and the surest way to minimize the amount of time you are
injured) is to react to pain experienced during running very quickly.
The more readily you abandon your training plan by switching from
running to cross-training when injury pain begins, the more closely
you will be able to follow your original plan in the long run.
--- PAGE 264 ---
Christy Johnson © Kim Hairston, The Baltimore Sun
Runner Profile: Christy Johnson
Christy Johnson is one of the first runners I coached, and one of
the only high school runners I have coached. Christy’s parents
approached me about their daughter as she was preparing for her
junior year of competition. She had demonstrated considerable talent
in her first two years of high school running, setting PRs of 2:23 for
800 meters and 5:30 for 1,600 meters, but her progress had been
thwarted by frequent injuries, including stress fractures and knee
pain. After explaining to Christy’s parents what sort of approach I
would use to keep their daughter healthy and guide her
development, they decided I was the right man for the job and I
worked with her for the next two years.
The training program Christy had followed in school lacked
balance. It featured far too much specific work and not enough
--- PAGE 265 ---
emphasis on muscle training and aerobic support. I corrected the
problem by reducing Christy’s specific work to one interval session
and one fartlek run per typical week; giving her lots of steep hill
sprints, which boosted her strength tremendously; and expanding
her base of easy aerobic running.
Throughout my first year of coaching Christy, I had only one goal,
which was to keep her healthy, knowing that, if I could achieve this
goal, performance would follow. Keeping Christy healthy required
that I be very flexible with her training—never looking too far ahead,
paying close attention to how her body responded to workouts, and
always trying to give her the workout she would benefit most from
each day.
This approach worked very well. At the end of her junior year,
Christy won the Colorado State Championship at 800 meters. Her
family moved to Maryland for Christy’s senior year, during which I
continued advising her and she lowered her personal best times to
2:13 for 800 meters and 4:54 for 1,600 meters. Christy is now a top
varsity runner at Princeton University.
--- PAGE 266 ---
Improving from Year to Year 9
         
If you take up the sport of distance running as a child, you can
expect to continue improving until you’re well over 30 years of age,
and to remain at your performance peak until you’re pushing 40. And
regardless of how old you are when you start running, you can
expect to be able to improve gradually for at least six or seven years.
So if you start running at age 40, there’s a pretty good chance you
will be significantly faster when you’re 47.
There’s a difference, of course, between being able to improve
over such a long period of time and actually doing so. Many runners
who would love nothing more than to continue improving for many
years hit a premature peak due to inconsistent training, injuries,
failure to build properly on past training, failure to learn from
experience, or even failure to believe in their ability to reach higher.
Most runners who stop improving before they feel they should blame
another factor: lack of time for the additional training that’s needed
for ongoing improvement; but this notion is a fallacy. I’ve never met a
nonelite runner who was training so perfectly that he or she could
only improve by training more.
--- PAGE 267 ---
Taking the long view is an important facet of adaptive running.
After all, adaptation of any sort takes time, and to achieve any
significant degree of adaptation, such as reaching one’s genetic limit
of physiological adaptation to running, usually takes a very long time.
As a coach, my ultimate objective is not just to help my runners
achieve their goal for the next race or the upcoming season; rather, it
is to set each runner on a steady course of improvement and to keep
him or her on that course of improvement as long as possible. Above
all, I want my runners to race better this year than last year, and to
race better next year than this year.
There are six keys to improving from year to year as a runner. I
keep each of them constantly in mind when charting a course for the
development of my athletes. The six keys are:
1. Consistency
2. Avoiding injuries
3. Building on past training
4. Learning from experience
5. Experimentation
6. Setting higher goals
Let’s take a close look at each of them.
Consistency
--- PAGE 268 ---
When you stop running or reduce your training workload, the
fitness adaptations that you worked so hard to achieve begin to
reverse themselves. Exercise scientists refer to this process as
“detraining.” The rest of us refer to it as getting out of shape.
Different aspects of detraining proceed at different rates, but most of
them proceed all too quickly, producing an almost immediate and
rapidly worsening decline in performance. For example, the
concentration of aerobic enzymes in the muscles may begin to
decline within two days after a runner stops training. A study from
the early 1990s found that performance in a high-intensity treadmill
running test decreased by more than 9 percent in a group of runners
who stopped running cold-turkey for two weeks. Other research has
shown that runners lose fitness when their training is interrupted at a
significantly faster rate than they gain fitness when they ramp up
their training.
It is very difficult to improve as a runner without consistency in
your training. When a reduction or interruption in training causes you
to lose fitness, you dig a hole for yourself that takes much longer to
climb out of than it took to create. By contrast, when you maintain a
solid foundation of fitness through consistent training, it is much
easier to achieve a higher level of performance through modest
short-term increases in training workload and/or improvements in
training practices.
Lack of consistency in training is one of the most common barriers
to improvement in nonelite competitive runners. Some training
interruptions are caused by injuries, which I will discuss in the next
section. But there is another common type of training lapse that is
more easily avoided: off-season slacking. Many runners simply
voluntarily get out of shape during the winter, when the weather is
foul, the days are short, and there are no races on the horizon.
Having lived, trained, and coached for many years in Boulder,
Colorado, where the winters can be truly savage, I have empathy for
those runners who slack in the off-season. I would even say that a
certain amount of off-season slacking is acceptable and even
--- PAGE 269 ---
healthy. Everyone needs a break now and then. But the unavoidable
fact is that if you want to improve from year to year, you have to stay
in decent shape through the winter.
It isn’t too difficult to get a break from the physical and mental
grind of race-focused training without losing much fitness. You can
cross-train indoors (cycling, aerobics, etc.) or outdoors
(snowshoeing, mountain biking, etc.) to keep your aerobic system
sharp while at the same time escaping the pounding of running and
enjoying the motivational boost that comes with variation. You may
even enhance some aspects of your fitness—particularly your
strength—by focusing on certain types of cross-training that you
have less time for during the rest of the year. Calisthenics,
weightlifting, and Pilates workouts are all good options. But whatever
you do, don’t go cold turkey on running. A week’s break is fine, but
otherwise you should try to run at least twice a week throughout the
winter to maintain the adaptations to repetitive impact that only
running provides and that take so long to regain once you’ve lost
them.
If you are a longtime off-season slacker, I think you’ll be amazed to
discover how much easier it is to reach a higher level of performance
in the spring if you maintain a solid foundation of fitness over the
winter.
Avoiding Injuries
Injuries are the most common factor that thwarts training
consistency at all levels of the sport of running. Improvement in
running is very difficult to come by if you’re frequently injured. But if
you’re able to stay healthy for an extended period of time and avoid
other training interruptions, improvement becomes virtually
automatic.
--- PAGE 270 ---
Over the years I’ve observed many cases of runners who
achieved stunning levels of improvement simply by overcoming a
pattern of bodily breakdowns and getting into a groove of steady
training. A great example is Shalane Flanagan. A promising runner
in her college and early professional years, Flanagan saw her career
seriously derailed in 2005, at age 25, when she developed a major
foot injury that required surgery and months of rehabilitation to fix.
When she was finally able to return to normal training, Flanagan felt
a renewed hunger to improve, and improve she did. In January 2007
she smashed her personal best time for 3,000 meters indoors by 21
seconds, clocking 8:33—a new American record. Three months
later, she bettered her 5,000-meter PR by an equal amount, setting
another new American record in the process. Flanagan’s mid-career
breakthrough shocked many people, including her, but the recipe
was nothing new: Consistent, dedicated training unleashing potential
previously hidden by injuries.
Shalane Flanagan © Alison Wade
--- PAGE 271 ---
Preventing injuries is the most important priority of training. Injuries
foil progress more than anything else, yet the harder you push for
progress in your training, the more likely it is that you will get injured.
Thus, if you don’t prioritize injury prevention with specific practices,
you’re very likely to break down sooner or later.
The most effective way to prevent injuries is to avoid running in
pain. Whenever unusual pain manifests in a bone, muscle, or joint,
stop running and don’t start running again until you can do so pain-
free. The surest way to prevent pain from emerging in the first place
is to never increase your training workload abruptly or do workouts
that are substantially harder than any workout you’ve done recently.
Maintaining a consistently high running workload will help you avoid
making such dangerously sudden increases.
As I’ve mentioned more than once already, running steep hill
sprints at least once a week drastically reduces injury susceptibility
by significantly strengthening the muscles and joints. Traditional
core-muscle training is a good supplement to hill sprints. Running
with proper technique is also important. If you’re a heel striker, learn
to run flat-footed. This will reduce the risk of knee injuries and shin
splints especially. Always wear the lightest, most comfortable
running shoes you can find, and replace them every 500 miles.
Finally, healthy eating plays a key role in injury prevention as well.
Include a nice balance of food types (fruits, vegetables, meats, dairy,
seafood, and whole grains) in your diet, minimize the amount of
processed, sugary, and fried foods you consume, and make sure
you get enough calories.
Building on Past Training
Each training cycle you complete changes your body. When you
begin a new training cycle, you are not the same runner you were
when you started the last one. Therefore, you should not train in
precisely the same way that you did in your last training cycle, no
--- PAGE 272 ---
matter how successful it was. In fact, in some ways, the more
successful your last training cycle was, the more you can and should
change the next one.
For example, suppose you struggled to handle the volume of
running you planned for your last training cycle. If this is the case,
the last thing you want to do is increase your training volume in the
next training cycle. But you just might be able to handle the same
running volume more comfortably in the next one, supposing you
take a short break to rejuvenate your body and ease back into hard
training. If, on the other hand, the running volume you planned for
your last training cycle seemed ideal—enough to build your fitness to
a high level but not so much that you struggled with it—then you’ll
probably be able to increase your running volume slightly in the next
training cycle. The “summit” of your recently completed training cycle
is now the foundation for the next.
Increasing your training volume is the simplest way to stimulate
year-to-year improvement by building on past training, but it is not
the only way, nor is it always the best way. At some point in their
development, all runners reach a point where their training volume is
either as high as they can take it without sacrificing the quality of
their workouts, or as high as they care to take it given the need to
balance running with other priorities in life. After this point is reached,
the only way to build on past training is to increase the specificity of
your training. And even before you reach your lifetime running-
volume limit, increasing the amount of race-specific training you do
from year to year is an important way to build on past training and
stimulate further improvement.
Over the course of your running career, the arc of your training
evolution should move from generality toward specificity, just as it
does within each individual training cycle in the adaptive running
system. When you start running, your training should place a heavy
emphasis on aerobic development and muscle training—the twin
foundations of running fitness. Your specific-endurance training
--- PAGE 273 ---
should be limited; do just enough to sharpen up for races. In
subsequent training cycles, build on your foundation by increasing
your total running volume and by doing tougher aerobic workouts
(longer and faster long runs and threshold runs) and more
challenging muscle-training sessions.
When foundation-building has taken you about as far as it will take
you, begin adding more and more specific-endurance work to your
training—that is, more work in the 3K-to-half-marathon pace range.
Each year, find a way to add slightly more of this type of training to
your regimen, whether it is by introducing it earlier in the training
cycle, by doing longer specific-endurance workouts, or by adding a
little extra specific-endurance work into other workouts besides those
that are entirely focused on specific endurance.
The movement from generality to specificity can only go so far, of
course. Even the most seasoned runners can only handle so much
specific-endurance training. Moderate aerobic-pace running will
necessarily always account for the majority of your weekly miles,
because your body can handle a lot of this type of training and
because doing a lot of it gives you a foundation to handle more
specific-endurance training. Your year-by-year increases in specific-
endurance training should be quite modest and should cease as
soon as you reach a point at which you feel you’re doing as much
specific-endurance running as your body will ever be able to handle.
Very few competitive runners really take advantage of this long-
view approach to training evolution. By becoming one of the few who
do, you will improve much more steadily and for a longer span of
time than you would otherwise.
Learning from Experience
Perhaps the most important skill you can develop to foster
improvement in your running is that of learning from experience. By
--- PAGE 274 ---
that I mean paying attention to how your body responds to various
training patterns, determining what works for you and what doesn’t,
and modifying your future training to include more of what does work
and less of what doesn’t. The most valuable service I provide the
runners I coach is the application of this skill to their training.
Cultivating the ability to learn from experience is the key to becoming
an effective self-coach.
The reason that the ability to learn from experience is so important
is that each runner is unique. If the same training methods worked
equally well for every runner, there would be no need to pay
attention to how your body responds to them. But because there’s no
predicting how your body will respond to individual workouts, let
alone long-term training patterns, ongoing improvement depends on
your ability to assess the effectiveness of workouts and training
patterns and to make appropriate adjustments based on these
assessments.
Day-by-day adjustments are needed to keep your training on track
toward a particular race goal, but year-to-year improvement requires
a broader scope of analysis. In November or December, after the
year’s last race is in the books, I sit down with each of my runners to
comprehensively analyze the past season. We talk about what went
right and what went wrong, and we try to identify the training patterns
that seemed to do the most good and those that seemed to do more
harm than good. Based on these discussions, we make some
decisions about how we’ll approach next year’s training: what we’ll
do similarly and what we’ll do differently.
You should do the same thing as a self-coached runner. During
your off-season break, set aside some time to look at your training
log and race results with a view toward identifying any specific
lessons they might offer. A full year of training and racing is hardly a
controlled experiment. There are so many variables at play that it’s
impossible to establish precise cause-and-effect relationships
between particular training patterns and particular fitness results with
--- PAGE 275 ---
perfect certainty. But if you have indeed paid close attention to your
body over the course of the year and kept a good training log, your
hunches will generally be fairly accurate. Following is a list of
questions you might want to ask yourself during your year-end
review, plus some ideas about how to use your answers in planning
your approach to next year’s training.
         
Did I perform as well as expected in my peak races?
The ultimate objective of your training is to maximize your
performance in peak races. So your peak-race performances are the
first things you should look at when assessing your past year’s
training. Every runner prefers a satisfying peak-race performance to
a disappointing one, but the silver lining around disappointing peak-
race performances is that they provide better learning opportunities.
Sometimes a disappointing peak-race performance results from
unrealistic expectations, but this scenario is much more likely to
affect inexperienced runners than experienced ones. Perhaps the
most common cause of failure to meet realistic expectations in a
peak race is peaking too early. Runners often spend too much time
doing specific, high-level training before a peak race and
consequently do their best running several weeks early. If you feel
you were running better a month or so before a peak race than you
did in the race itself, and you did in fact sustain high-level, race-
specific training for some time before the race, then consider
modifying next year’s training in ways that will ensure that you don’t
peak early again. Specifically, concentrate your peak-level training
closer to the actual peak race. Extend your fundamental period of
training so that you’ve achieved a higher level of general fitness
when you begin doing hard, specific work.
In other cases, a disappointing peak-race performance results
from the opposite cause. You fail to peak at all because you don’t
--- PAGE 276 ---
allow enough time to build peak-level fitness and/ or you don’t do
enough peak-level training before the race. If your training cycle
leading up to a disappointing peak race was compressed or hurried,
plan a longer training cycle next year. And if your training cycle did
not culminate with at least four solid weeks of peak-level training
featuring lots of challenging race-specific workouts, be sure that your
next training plan includes a sharpening period that fits this
description.
Another common cause of disappointing peak-race performance is
failure to taper properly. Some runners race best when they engage
in a modest taper, approaching the pre-race week as they would a
normal recovery week. Other runners race best when they taper
more drastically, starting their taper 10 days to two weeks before a
peak race and reducing their training to a minimal level in the final
week. If you feel that a poor taper might be the cause of a
disappointing peak race in the past year, consider trying a different
sort of taper next year. If your taper was short and modest, try a
longer and/or sharper taper.
If your taper was fairly extreme, try doing a taper that’s more like a
normal recovery week.
--- PAGE 277 ---
Sometimes a bad race is due to a bad taper, not necessarily bad
training. © Alison Wade
How did I perform in my tune-up races?
After assessing last year’s peak-race performances, assess your
tune-up race performances. Runners often perform better in tune-up
races than they do in peak races. This phenomenon may indicate
that the runner peaked too early and should modify his or her future
training to avoid a repetition of this scenario.
It’s also common for runners to perform very poorly in tune-up
races that fall early in the training cycle and to run steadily better in
subsequent races. While this pattern does suggest that the runner’s
training was effective, it usually also indicates that the runner started
the training cycle at a relatively low fitness level and that much of the
training cycle was wasted on playing catch-up. As I suggested
above, I believe it is important to sustain a high level of base fitness
year-round, so that when you begin formal training for a peak race
--- PAGE 278 ---
you don’t have to play catch-up and can instead train in a way that
builds on your solid foundation and takes your running performance
to new heights.
If a tendency to get out of shape between training cycles is the
probable explanation for poor performance in your early tune-up
races, try to plan next year’s training in a way that enables you to
stay consistently fit and start each training cycle at a higher level.
         
Did my running volume hold me back in any way?
After assessing your race performances, next look back over your
training logs and consider the volume of running you did over the
past year. Estimate your average weekly running mileage, determine
your peak weekly running mileage, and note the size of volume
fluctuations throughout the year. Now try to establish a cause-and-
effect relationship between these volume numbers and the fitness
development and race results you achieved in the past year.
Ask yourself the following questions: Could my body have handled
more mileage than I took on last year? If so, is it likely that running
slightly more miles would have improved my fitness and
performance? In other words, was I held back by inadequate running
volume? Or did I try to run too much last year? Would I have
performed better in my key workouts if I had run slightly less in other
workouts? Was I frequently fatigued or injured due to excessive
mileage?
In answering these questions, bear in mind that problems that
seem to result from excessive training volume are often caused by
excessive fluctuations in running mileage. Injuries and overtraining
fatigue tend to develop during periods of increasing running volume.
If you allow your running volume to fall too low at one or more times
during a running season, you have to devote more time to the
--- PAGE 279 ---
process of making relatively larger volume increases when you begin
focused preparation for a peak race. As a result you’re likelier to run
more miles than your body is prepared to handle. If you experienced
large fluctuations in your training volume last year, concentrate on
making your running volume more consistent next year. If you do,
you’ll probably find that the peak running volume that seemed to be
too much last year is easily handled and more productive this time
around.
         
Was my training poorly balanced?
Most runners are also held back by the quality of running they do
as much as they are by the quantity of running they do. Specifically,
their training lacks balance. Every competitive road racer should
consistently include the following training stimuli in his or her training:
easy runs, long runs, threshold runs, specific-endurance intervals,
speed intervals, and maximal efforts (e.g., short hill sprints). The
majority of your weekly running should be done at lower intensities,
and only a tiny fraction should be done at maximal intensity, but no
training stimulus should ever be overemphasized or marginalized.
Very few nonelite runners train with appropriate balance. Improving
the balance of your training stimuli is a simple way to improve your
running without training more, or even harder, necessarily.
         
Was I limited by my aerobic fitness?
A “performance limiter” is a relative weakness in your running
fitness that is the primary factor preventing you from performing
better at any given time. If your aerobic fitness is underdeveloped
relative to your neuromuscular fitness and specific endurance, then
aerobic fitness will be your limiter. If your neuromuscular fitness is
--- PAGE 280 ---
lagging behind your aerobic fitness and specific endurance, then
neuromuscular fitness will place a ceiling on your running
performance. And if your specific endurance is weaker than your
aerobic fitness and neuromuscular fitness, then your specific
endurance will hinder your overall fitness development.
A sure way to improve your running next year is to analyze your
past year of running, identify your primary limiter, and find ways to
address it in next year’s training. Start with aerobic fitness. There are
several possible signs that you were limited by your aerobic fitness
in the past year. The first is a tendency to perform better in shorter
races than in longer races. Another sign of lagging aerobic fitness is
a trend of stronger performance in shorter, faster workouts than in
longer, slower workouts. Did you tend to feel substantially stronger
running intervals at 1,500-meter to 3K pace than you did running
threshold workouts at 10K to half-marathon pace? If so, then aerobic
fitness was probably your Achilles’ heel. Poor recovery between
workouts may also indicate relatively low aerobic fitness.
There are three ways to address limiting aerobic fitness in
planning next year’s training. First, you can increase your overall
running volume by adding one or more additional easy runs to your
weekly schedule or by slightly increasing the average distance of
your easy runs. This option is most appropriate for less experienced
runners who have run low mileage in the past and feel ready and
willing to run more. A second option is to increase the average
intensity of your aerobic training by adding more threshold work to
your schedule, tacking faster progressions onto the end of some
easy runs, and incorporating faster running into your long runs. This
is a good option for runners with at least a couple of years of training
experience in their legs who are limited in their ability or willingness
to increase their running volume. Finally, you can boost your aerobic
fitness by doing longer long runs next year. I consider this option a
good one for any runner who was limited by his or her aerobic fitness
and is not already doing the longest long runs that are sensible with
respect to his or her peak-race distance.
--- PAGE 281 ---
         
Was I limited by my neuromuscular fitness?
There are three major signs that you lacked adequate
neuromuscular fitness in the past year. The first two are more or less
the opposite of the first two signs of inadequate aerobic fitness
mentioned above. If you tended to perform best in your longest races
and worst in your shortest ones, and/or if you tended to feel stronger
in longer, slower workouts than you did in shorter, faster workouts,
your neuromuscular fitness was probably a limiter. A third indicator of
limiting neuromuscular fitness is injuries or problems with muscle
and tendon soreness.
The best way to address limiting neuromuscular fitness in planning
next year’s training depends on precisely how it limited you last year.
If you feel that you simply lacked adequate speed and power, add
more hill sprints and more interval work at 1,500-meter to 3K pace to
your training. This doesn’t necessarily mean you have to do a
greater total amount of speed and power training in the early
fundamental period, when this type of training receives its greatest
emphasis. It might just mean that you train for speed and power
more consistently throughout the training cycle by introducing it
earlier and by not deemphasizing it as much in the later stages of the
training cycle.
If you feel that you lacked strength more than you lacked raw
sprint speed and power, the best response is to add some additional
uphill running to your training next year. Specifically, run more hill
repetitions, especially at the beginning of the fundamental period. In
the remainder of the training cycle, transfer some of the interval work
you would normally do on level ground to hills.
Hills are also my prescription to correct problems with injuries and
soreness. If you had these problems last year, increase your
commitment to steep hill sprints next year by doing more total sprints
--- PAGE 282 ---
each week and by doing them more consistently throughout the
training cycle. This will enhance the strength of your running muscles
and connective tissues, making them more injury-resistant. You
might also benefit from transferring some of the interval work you
would normally perform on level ground to hills. This will allow you to
build speed with less stress on the legs.
         
Was I limited by my specific endurance?
If your aerobic or neuromuscular fitness level is lower than it
should be, your specific-endurance fitness will suffer as well,
because specific endurance is nothing more than a goal-specific
combination of aerobic and neuromuscular fitness. But it is possible
to have well-developed aerobic and neuromuscular fitness and still
be limited by your specific endurance. This problem results from a
failure to combine your aerobic and neuromuscular fitness in the
appropriate way for your peak-race distance and goal time.
Suppose you’re training for a 10K peak race. Your training
program includes a fairly high volume of easy running, weekly long
runs, and healthy doses of hill sprints and short intervals at 1,500-
meter to 3K pace. But it does not include threshold runs or 10K-pace
intervals—the workouts that are most specific to 10K racing. In this
case you will reach a level of fitness that enables you to perform very
well in your hill sprints, short intervals, and long runs, and you will
probably run a decent 10K, too. But you will not perform as well in
your peak race as you would if you included more specific-
endurance work in your training.
If you had a disappointing peak race last year despite performing
well in your speed work and long runs during the latter weeks of
training, then you were most likely limited by your specific
endurance. The same diagnosis can be made if you tended to feel
stronger in workouts in which you ran substantially faster or slower
--- PAGE 283 ---
than race pace than you did in workouts run at or near race pace.
And if you simply did not do much race-pace running last year, you
can be sure you were limited by your specific endurance even in the
absence of other signs.
The cure for a diagnosis of limiting specific endurance is obvious.
Do more specific-endurance training next year! Be sure to introduce
a small amount of specific-endurance work, in the form of fartlek
intervals and/or progressions (depending on your peak-race
distance), at the beginning of the training cycle. Gradually increase
the amount of specific-endurance training throughout the training
cycle. In the sharpening period, all three of your weekly hard
workouts should be highly race-specific.
Experimentation
Everything you do in training is an experiment, and it should all be
viewed as such. You never know exactly how your body will respond
to any specific workout or training pattern. Your expectations for how
your body will respond are nothing more than a hypothesis. When
your body’s actual response to training differs from your
expectations, you must revise your hypothesis and tweak your future
training accordingly. Too often, runners hang on to their hypotheses
concerning the workouts and training patterns that ought to work
best for them even after their application disproves them. Don’t make
this mistake! When a given training practice does not work as well as
expected, try a new one.
There is, of course, a converse aspect to this principle. When a
given training practice does work for you, it’s important that you
retain it. But competitive runners are much more likely to retain
familiar practices that don’t work than to discard proven practices
that do.
--- PAGE 284 ---
The fact that a certain training practice appears to give you good
results does not mean that an alternative practice might not give you
even better results, however. For this reason, I recommend that you
stay open to experimentation even when you feel that everything in
your training is working. There is no such thing as perfect training.
The concept of perfection implies permanence and stasis. But in the
process of training for distance running, your body is constantly
changing. Consequently, training patterns that seem perfect for you
now will no longer be perfect for you next year, or even next month.
If you train exactly the same way next year or next month, you will
not improve as much as you would if you took account of changes in
your running fitness and modified your training appropriately.
I am not talking about drastic changes. Once you have begun to
practice adaptive running, there will be no more need for drastic
changes in your training. But there are plenty of minor changes you
can make that will have a measurable impact on your progress as a
runner. These minor changes are mainly to be found at the level of
workout formats. There is a whole universe of specific workout
formats out there. This book contains only a fraction of them. I
encourage you to continuously learn about other workouts and try
those that are compatible with the adaptive running system and
seem to offer some potential to improve your performance.
I try new workouts on my runners all the time. Recently I borrowed
a new workout from Nic Bideau, who coaches the Australian runner
Craig Mottram. The workout starts (following a warm-up, of course)
with six laps around the track. The first lap is typically run at 10K
pace or slightly slower. Each subsequent lap is a little faster. The
sixth lap is run at 3K to 1,500-meter pace. The runner then jogs a lap
and completes a set of eight 200-meter intervals at 5K to 3K pace
with 100-meter active recoveries after each. This entire sequence is
then repeated. (If you choose to try this workout, you will probably
want to complete the sequence just one time.) I like this workout
because it allows my runners to perform a fairly large amount of
work in a way that is not too taxing. Also, it can be adjusted for use
--- PAGE 285 ---
at any point in the training cycle through manipulation of the pace
targets.
It’s best to experiment in a controlled way. I don’t recommend
trying new workouts too frequently or testing multiple new workouts
simultaneously. As important as adaptability is in training, structure is
also important. The single most important characteristic of a training
cycle is direction. It has to move consistently in the direction of race-
specific fitness. It’s very difficult to ensure that your training is doing
this if you are constantly changing things. To ensure that they are
truly building on each other, your workouts must maintain a “family
resemblance” throughout the training process, changing only within
certain strict parameters. Once you’ve settled on the types of
workouts you plan to do in your next training cycle, it’s best to stick
with them, modifying only the details based on how your body
responds. Thus, the best time to select new workouts to try is
between training cycles, when you’re planning and have not yet
started the next ramp-up toward a peak race.
Setting Higher Goals
Suppose I challenged you to run as far as you could at a certain
pace. My instructions were to hang on at the designated pace until
you were so exhausted that you could not take another single stride
without slowing down. Now let’s suppose you were able to run 13.91
miles at this pace before throwing in the towel. Knowing this, I could
almost guarantee that if I had challenged you not to run as far as you
could at that pace, but to run 14 miles at the same pace, you could
have done it, because that objective goal would have motivated you
to push through a little more suffering than you believed you could
overcome without the goal.
This little thought experiment is intended to make the point that it
is impossible to produce a truly maximal race effort without chasing
some type of goal, whether it’s beating another runner to the finish
--- PAGE 286 ---
line or beating a personal best time for the distance. You might think
you’re running as hard as you can when you race without any
particular goal established, but you’re not. It’s an unalterable reality
of how the mind affects the body during running.
Naturally, the mind can overcome only so much matter. You
cannot achieve just any goal simply by setting it. Going back to the
thought experiment described above, if I had challenged you to run
15 miles at the designated pace, knowing that you could only run
13.91 miles without a goal, chances are very slim that you could
have run an extra 1.09 miles without slowing down. An appropriate
goal challenges you to push just a little bit harder than you otherwise
would—to squeeze the last 1 percent of reserve that your mind
allows your body to hold back without such a demand.
Past race performances provide the best information to use in
setting appropriate future race goals. In most cases, next year’s goal
time for a given race distance should be slightly faster than the best
time you achieved for that distance last year. Accumulating fitness
and better training will render your body able to perform at a higher
level next year, but you might not fully realize the potential of these
changes unless you set goals that demand it. In other words, on top
of everything else discussed in this chapter, improvement requires
that you aim for improvement. When setting goals for next year, try
to account for not only accumulating fitness and better training, but
also for the need to reach higher in your mind so that your body can
follow.
--- PAGE 287 ---
Andy Smith © Courtesy of the New York Road Runners
Runner Profile: Andy Smith
A lot of the runners I coach come to me as hard-luck cases—
athletes whose careers have been stymied by frequent or major
injury setbacks. Andy Smith might be the greatest hard-luck case of
all. A 2005 graduate of North Carolina State University, Andy had
only been able to run one race in two years due to injuries that
culminated in surgery for compartment syndrome.
My work with Andy began with post-surgery rehabilitation in the
early spring of 2007. My primary goal was to gradually and steadily
increase his running volume to the point at which he was running
twice a day and at least 100 miles per week. I was confident that by
cautiously transforming Andy into a high-mileage runner I could
greatly increase his durability and resilience.
--- PAGE 288 ---
In college, Andy had trained on the Lydiard system, which is
characterized by lots of hard aerobic runs and very distinct training
phases. I had him reduce the intensity of his aerobic running so that
he could handle a much greater volume of such running, which was
necessary to stimulate further aerobic development. Also, as I do
with every runner, I made Andy’s training more consistently well
rounded, introducing hill sprints and small amounts of specific-
endurance work as soon after his surgery as I felt it was safe to do
so and steadily increasing the balance of his training from there.
Andy’s primary event is the 3,000-meter steeplechase. Just eight
weeks after his surgery, Andy ran an 8:34 steeplechase—just five
seconds off his personal best time from college. Two weeks later he
posted a personal best time of 13:38 for 5,000 meters. The future
looks bright for this former hard-luck case.
--- PAGE 289 ---
The Self-Coaching Journey 10
         
We’ve covered a lot of ground in the preceding pages. The finish line
is almost within sight. The next chapter is an “optional read” for youth
and masters runners. The final chapter presents a selection of
training plans that you may or may not choose to follow, or that you
may choose to follow more or less exactly. You have already learned
almost everything this book teaches about my adaptive running
system. The time to start practicing it is drawing near. So, now what?
Let me begin to answer this question by telling you what would
happen if you moved to Eugene, Oregon, and I began coaching you
directly. The process would start with my asking you a lot of
questions. These questions would fall into two general categories:
(1) questions about your past as a runner, and (2) questions about
the future you envision for yourself as a runner. Before I could take
any sensible action as your coach, I would need to pick your brain
for a good deal of information in these two general categories. The
first steps we took together as a coach-athlete team would be
designed to build on your past running and move in the direction of
your short-term and long-term future goals.
--- PAGE 290 ---
These initial steps might be very different for you than they would
be for another runner. I might increase your running volume while
slightly reducing another runner’s volume, or vice versa. I might have
you do less speed work and more threshold work while having
another runner do more specific-endurance work and less easy
running. It all depends on the details of your respective running
experience and goals.
Nevertheless, there would be some similarities. For both you and
this hypothetical other runner, the primary objective of the first
several weeks of training under my guidance would be simply to get
accustomed to the adaptive running methods described in detail in
chapter 2. These methods include the standard weekly workout
schedule presented on Chapter 7, steep-hill sprints, and very slow
recovery runs. While the specific mix of workouts I gave you would
be the blend that I expected to work best for you, we could not
possibly predict exactly how your body would respond to them.
Therefore these first weeks would also be a period of intense
information gathering. We would closely monitor your performance in
workouts, your fatigue level, and your aches and pains, and make
any necessary adjustments based on these observations.
Except in the unlikely event that you developed an early injury or
illness, these corrections would not be drastic, but they could be
important. For example, we might find that you did not perform well
in your Sunday long runs due to inadequate recovery from Friday’s
specific-endurance and speed workouts. In response to this
observation, we might move your specific-endurance and speed
workouts from Friday to Tuesday and move Tuesday’s threshold
runs, which you seem to recover from more quickly, from Tuesday to
Friday.
This cycle of executing planned training, observing the results, and
making small corrections based on the specific results we observed
would continue until you ran your next peak race. After this race was
completed we would measure your performance against our
--- PAGE 291 ---
expectations, look back at the entire training cycle leading up to that
race, and try to draw larger conclusions about what we did right,
what we did wrong, and how we should change your training in the
next training cycle.
The whole experience, as you can see, is one long experiment. If
you came to me for coaching with the expectation that I would
instantly know exactly what to do with you and “just do it,” you would
be very disappointed. Everything I know about running suffices only
to help runners start on the right foot and continually learn from their
training and racing, and improve based on this learning. And the
greatest amount of learning comes from failures, setbacks, and
disappointments, which you would be sure to experience with me as
your coach.
This pattern applies to every runner I have ever coached, including
the very best runners. Dathan Ritzenhein’s first marathon is a good
example. His 11th-place finish and 2:14:01 finishing time in the 2006
New York City Marathon were big disappointments when measured
against our expectations. Together we looked closely at this race and
the preceding training and tried to identify where we took a wrong
turn. We decided that the problem was not any single major wrong
turn but rather a number of smaller missteps. There was evidence
that Dathan actually peaked two weeks early (he ran phenomenal
workouts and felt unstoppable at this time, but then began slipping),
so we took steps to delay his peak in preparation for the 2008 U.S.
Olympic Team Trials–Men’s Marathon, which was his next attempt at
the 26.2-mile distance. We also felt that Dathan needed more raw
endurance, so we included more long runs in the 20-to 24-mile range
in his second marathon ramp-up. Also, based on the fact that Dathan
did not consume any nutrition after the three-mile mark of his first
marathon, we came to the obvious conclusion that he needed to take
in more fluid and more energy in the Olympic Trials, so we had him
practice consuming carbohydrate gels and water in his longer race-
pace workouts and stick to a strict schedule of gel and water
consumption in the race. It all paid off. Dathan ran a time of 2:11:07
--- PAGE 292 ---
on a much tougher course and claimed a slot on the Olympic team
with a second-place finish.
When you finish reading this book and begin to practice adaptive
running, you will move through a process that looks very much like
the process I just described, in which we imagined that I began
coaching you one-on-one. The information in this book will substitute
for the knowledge in my head that I would apply in coaching you
directly. Refer back to these pages as often as necessary as you
proceed through your self-coaching journey. The more important
functions of my role as a coach—monitoring my athletes’ response
to workouts, analyzing their workout and race results, and planning
future training on the basis of this monitoring and analysis—are
functions that you will have to fulfill on your own behalf. But it does
not take any special skill to do these things. They are simply habits
that you will practice with increasing effectiveness as you gain
experience. Again, all of the guidelines you need to begin building
these habits are contained in this book.
The most important consideration to keep in mind when taking
your first steps in practicing adaptive running is that this training
system is very much a step-by-step process. The first step, as I
suggested above, is simply to try the core methods of the system
and see how you respond. Don’t burden yourself by thinking beyond
this initial test. The time to look farther ahead is after you have
gathered enough experience in practicing the adaptive running
methods to have a good sense of what is working and what is not
working, so you can base your planning on these observations rather
than on some abstract ideas about what ought to work for you. This
cycle of training, analyzing, and adjusting will continue indefinitely,
just as it does for my runners and me. At first you may feel you’re
groping in the dark, exactly as I do when I begin working with a new
athlete. The longer you coach yourself, the more confident and
competent you will become in this role, but you will never achieve full
mastery. You will continue to learn, and to adapt based on what you
learn, and to improve thanks to your adaptability.
--- PAGE 293 ---
Running Faster
The goal of every competitive runner is to run faster. Achieving this
goal, by setting a new personal best race time every now and again,
is one of the most rewarding experiences in the life of the
competitive runner. It would be a lot less satisfying, though, if running
faster was totally predictable—if we always knew exactly what we
needed to do to improve, so that actually improving was strictly a
matter of going out and doing it. Improvement is quite predictable for
beginning runners, naturally, but once your race times have
progressed to a certain level and you have passed a certain
threshold of training volume, figuring out how to stimulate further
improvement becomes as challenging as the workouts themselves. I
like it that way. The difficulty of discovering how to run faster lends
the sport an exciting intellectual dimension and makes those hard-
won moments of running faster all the more rewarding.
The art of coaching, and of self-coaching, is fundamentally a
matter of taking a systematic approach to training that makes better
performance more or less inevitable, if not entirely predictable. It
begins with the premise that you cannot predict the future—or,
specifically, how your body will respond to training. Therefore every
workout is treated as an experiment. You then allow the results of
these experiments to guide you toward a future of running faster.
Training patterns that seem to hold you back are eliminated while
those that seem to push you forward are kept and possibly increased
or intensified. Sooner or later, this approach is bound to lead you to
new personal best performances.
I like to draw an analogy between the way adaptive running yields
personal records and the way world records are continually lowered
over the years. No one can predict when a world record in a major
running event such as the marathon will be broken, but we know that
the existing record will be broken sooner or later. History leaves no
doubt about it. The men’s marathon world record has been broken
29 times since 1913, and the women’s world record has been broken
--- PAGE 294 ---
an equal number of times since 1964. Table 10.1 shows the specific
progressions.
Table 10.1 Progression of Men’s and Women’s Marathon World
Records
The men’s marathon world record has been broken approximately once
every 3.25 years over the past century. The women’s marathon world record
has been broken roughly once every 1.5 years since the event was first
contested less than half a century ago.
Men Women
Time Date Time Date
2:36:06 5-31-1913 3:27:45 5-23-1964
2:32:35 8-20-1920 3:19:33 7-21-1964
2:29:01 10-13-1925 3:15:22 5-6-1967
2:27:49 3-31-1935 3:07:26 9-16-1967
2:26:44 4-3-1935 3:02:53 2-28-1970
2:26:42 11-3-1935 3:01:42 5-9-1971
--- PAGE 295 ---
2:25:39 4-19-1947 2:55:22 9-19-1971
2:20:42 6-14-1952 2:49:40 12-5-1971
2:18:40 7-13-1953 2:46:36 12-2-1973
2:18:34 10-4-1953 2:46:24 10-27-1974
2:17:39 7-26-1954 2:43:54 12-1-1974
2:15:17 8-24-1958 2:42:24 4-21-1975
2:15:16 9-10-1960 2:40:15 5-3-1975
2:15:15 2-17-1963 2:38:19 10-12-1975
2:14:28 7-15-1963 2:35:15 5-1-1977
2:13:55 7-13-1964 2:34:47 9-10-1977
2:12:11 10-21-1964 2:32:29 10-22-1978
2:12:00 6-12-1965 2:27:32 10-21-1979
2:09:36 12-3-1967 2:25:41 10-26-1980
2:08:33 5-3-1969 2:25:29 10-25-1981
--- PAGE 296 ---
2:08:18 12-6-1981 2:25:28 4-17-1983
2:08:05 10-21-1984 2:22:43 4-18-1983
2:07:12 4-20-1985 2:21:06 4-21-1985
2:06:50 4-17-1988 2:20:47 4-19-1998
2:06:05 9-20-1998 2:20:43 9-26-1999
2:05:42 10-24-1999 2:19:46 9-30-2001
2:05:38 4-14-2002 2:18:47 10-7-2001
2:04:55 9-28-2003 2:17:18 10-13-2002
2:04:26 9-30-2007 2:15:25 4-13-2003
How is it that the breaking of world records is inevitable yet
unpredictable? And for that matter, how is it that human beings keep
managing to improve the historical best times in standard running
events such as the marathon? The answer to both questions is that
the worldwide sport of distance running is itself an adaptive system
that is perfectly designed to push back the limits of human
performance. When a runner sets a new world record, other elite
runners begin to emulate the training practices and other factors
associated with that performance, beginning with simply aiming for
the new world best time in future races. The result is an evolutionary
process by which innovative and superior practices spread
--- PAGE 297 ---
throughout the population of competitive runners, becoming
standard.
A very simple example has to do with the races in which marathon
world records are broken. The world record performances listed in
the top half of table 10.1 took place in a wide variety of different
marathon events, many of which featured less than ideal courses for
world record setting. The world record performances in the bottom
half of the table came from just a handful of events: the London,
Chicago, Rotterdam, and Berlin marathons, all of which feature
pancake-flat courses and “rabbits” (or pacesetters) to facilitate fast
times. The sport of distance running has passed beyond the
evolutionary stage at which it was possible to set a world record on a
course with significant hills, such as the New York City Marathon
(where the women’s world record was broken four straight years
between 1978 and 1981).
If we looked behind the race performances at the training of world
record breakers we would see a similar evolutionary process. The
most basic adaptation is increasing training mileage. Grete Waitz ran
only 70 miles per week prior to breaking the marathon world record
in 1978. The current world record holder, Paula Radcliffe, ran 150
miles per week in preparing for her all-time best performance. The
marathon world record will never again be broken by someone who
trains much less than this amount.
The factor that makes world records unpredictable, despite their
inevitability, is the accidental nature of the innovations that make
better performances possible. Innovations such as altitude training,
cross-training, sports drinks, and elite running teams have
undoubtedly contributed to the downward march of marathon world
record times, yet their effects and even their emergence were
entirely unforeseeable. Each of these innovations, as well as most
innovations in specific training practices, came about as the result of
a single person or a small group of people simply trying something
that worked, and then spread throughout the sport.
--- PAGE 298 ---
Your quest to run faster than you’ve ever run before will closely
parallel the process by which humanity continually redefines the
limits of human running performance. Your journey as a self-coached
runner using the adaptive running system will involve the same
process of experimentation leading to adaptation and better
performance. The parameters are much narrower for you, of course,
as they are for any runner in comparison to the full history of the
sport of distance running. Your innovations are more likely to consist
in making small refinements to your training based on your progress
and accumulated experience rather than in discovering things like
altitude training and sports drinks. But the basic game is the same.
Try stuff. See how it goes. Do more of what improves your running
and less of what does not. This is the recipe for running faster at all
levels of the sport—all the way from the first person across the finish
line to the last. You might not be accustomed to comparing yourself
to world record breakers, but you’ll get used to it.
--- PAGE 299 ---
Adaptive Running for Youth and Masters
Runners 11
         
A 15-year-old runner should not train the same way that a 25-year
old runner does. Likewise, a 65-year-old runner should not—and in
all probability cannot—train the same way that either a 15-year-old
runner or a 25-year-old runner does. Our bodies change dramatically
over the course of our lives. Since the adaptive running system is
based on the principle that one’s training must be customized to
one’s own body, it follows that youth runners (under 20) and masters
runners (over 40) need to practice adaptive running somewhat
differently than those in the middle.
Youth runners are, by virtue of their age, relatively new to running,
and not only to running but also to exercise in general. For this
reason, the primary focus of their training should be to develop a
foundation of aerobic fitness and neuromuscular fitness from the
most basic level. The first step in the long process of developing a
lifetime-peak level of aerobic fitness is to gradually inure the body to
increasing mileage. There is little to be gained at this point from
more advanced types of aerobic training such as longer threshold
--- PAGE 300 ---
runs or faster long runs. Almost all of the running that youth runners
do should occur at an easy pace, which facilitates increasing
mileage better than hard running does.
The first step in developing neuromuscular fitness is to perform a
small number of very short, maximal-intensity efforts. As you know, I
believe that the safest and most effective form of maximal-intensity
training for all runners is short hill sprints. Youth runners should also
work on developing balanced muscle strength throughout their
bodies by engaging in regular resistance training—particularly core-
muscle work—and participating in other sports, such as basketball
and soccer. These efforts to develop whole-body muscle balance will
pay off in the future by reducing injury risk when the runner focuses
on running and trains at a high level as an adult.
The major difference between the bodies of youth runners and
those of masters runners is that the bodies of youth runners are
much more resilient. They adapt to and recover from training stress
faster. Consequently, youth runners can increase their training
workload faster and, eventually, handle a greater overall training
workload. Properly trained older runners can handle hard workouts,
but they cannot do them as often as younger runners can.
The muscles and connective tissues of masters runners are less
elastic than those of youth runners. Tissue elasticity plays a critical
role in enhancing running economy, because it enables runners to
capture energy provided by impact forces and reuse it by directing it
back into the ground. There is some evidence that years of high-
volume running accelerate the age-related decline in elasticity of the
muscles and connective tissues of the legs. This may explain why
most of the distance-running world records in the older age
categories (age 50 and beyond) are held by individuals who began
running rather late in life. In any case, older runners need to train
efficiently—focusing on “big-bang-for-the-buck” workouts and
minimizing “filler” workouts—in order to minimize the negative effects
of repetitive impact on tissue elasticity in their legs.
--- PAGE 301 ---
Joint mobility and muscle strength also tend to decline with age.
You can slow this process drastically through mobility training and
strength training. These types of cross-training are beneficial to
runners of every age, but they are especially helpful to older runners.
In view of all of these aging factors—slower recovery and
adaptation, declining tissue elasticity, and declining mobility and
strength—I recommend that masters runners take a cross-training-
based approach to training. In this approach, one runs only three or
four times per week; most or all of these runs are harder workouts;
and the running schedule is supplemented with nonimpact cardio
cross-training, mobility training, and strength training.
In this chapter, I will present four training plans for youth runners
and a pair of training plans for masters runners. Because most youth
runners follow training programs overseen by their coaches during
the school year, my youth training plans are summer base-training
plans designed to get high school runners in shape for the cross-
country season. The two masters training plans are road-race–
focused. The first culminates in a 10K peak race, the second in a
marathon peak race. In addition to being useful in themselves, these
plans can serve as general models that you can use to modify any of
the training plans presented in the next chapter to make them better
suited to masters runners.
Workout Key
The training plans themselves provide most of the information that
you’ll need to do each workout correctly. The following workout key
provides supplementary guidelines for some of the workouts
prescribed in the four youth training plans and the two masters
training plans.
         
--- PAGE 302 ---
Easy Run—Run the prescribed distance at a natural, comfortable
pace.
Hill Sprints—Run the prescribed distance at maximal effort up a steep
hill. Recover by walking back down. Complete the prescribed
number of repetitions. Start your hill sprints as soon as you finish
your easy run.
X-Train—Cross-train in a nonimpact aerobic activity such as bicycling
or elliptical training. Mimic the intensity of your easy runs.
Core Workout/Strength—Perform five or six exercises to strengthen
the muscles of the hips, buttocks, abdomen, lower back, and upper
torso.
 artlek Run—Run the first and last miles of the prescribed workout at
your easy-run pace. Also run the middle segment at your easy-run
pace, but accelerate to the designated interval pace for the
prescribed duration and number of fartlek intervals. These intervals
do not need to be evenly spaced out, but allow enough active
recovery time after each to ensure that you’re ready for the next.
 trides—Do these short intervals at 1,500-meter pace immediately
after finishing your easy run. Recover by jogging back to your
starting point.
Drills—See Chapter 4.
Progression Run—Start the run at your easy-run pace. Do the last
portion at either a “moderate” effort (an effort that feels moderately
hard relative to the distance) or a “hard” effort (an effort that feels
hard but manageable relative to the distance). Do uphill progressions
on a long, steady, moderate incline (or on a treadmill set at a 4-to 6-
percent incline), if possible. Do all other progressions on flat or
relatively flat terrain.
--- PAGE 303 ---
ong Run—Sunday runs are designated as long runs by default in
these schedules, regardless of their length, because “long” is relative
and Sunday is set aside as a day for endurance-building stimuli in
the adaptive running system. Even when they are only four or five
miles, long runs are almost always as long as, or longer than, any
other run in the same week.
Training Plans for Youth Runners
In this section I present four summer base-training plans for youth
runners. Each is 12 weeks long. The “Freshman Plan” peaks at 26
miles per week, the “Sophomore Plan” at 39 miles per week, the
“Junior Plan” at 54 miles per week, and the “Senior Plan”—for
serious and experienced high school runners—at 70 miles per week.
--- PAGE 312 ---
Training Plans for Masters Runners
In this section, I present a pair of training plans designed
especially for masters runners. The first plan is a 16-week schedule
culminating in a 10K peak race. The second is a 20-week schedule
culminating in a marathon peak race. Both plans are cross-training–
based and include only three running workouts per week.
--- PAGE 322 ---
Jo Ankier © Michael Steele, Getty Images
Runner Profile: Jo Ankier
Jo Ankier is one of Great Britain’s top middle-distance runners.
She contacted me after her friend Jorge Torres told her about the
good results he had achieved through working with me. Jo was not
willing to relocate to the United States, and I was only lukewarm
about the idea of coaching her via e-mail, but we agreed to try
working together long-distance on a trial basis and see how it went.
Jo has a lot of natural speed and started as an 800-meter/1,500-
meter specialist, but now her focus is the 3,000-meter steeplechase.
To build her aerobic strength, I’ve concentrated on increasing her
total running mileage. This was somewhat challenging initially
because Jo worked full-time as a television journalist in London. I
worked around this constraint by dividing her daily mileage more
evenly between morning and evening runs than I would normally do.
--- PAGE 323 ---
Jo’s racing has been erratic since I started working with her. She
has had some excellent performances and a few forgettable ones. I
believe that the keys to improving Jo’s consistency and raising her
overall level of performance lie in getting her used to running
consistently high mileage and in finding the right balance between
group and solo training.
I have found that Jo is one of those runners who thrive on intra-
group competition in workouts, and she loses motivation when
training alone. When I started working with Jo I pulled her out of her
group workouts to give her workouts that I thought would serve her
better, but for some runners, the wrong workout in the right group is
more beneficial than the right workout run alone.
Look for big things from Jo Ankier in the future, after we figure out
her optimal training recipe.
--- PAGE 324 ---
Adaptive Training Plans 12
         
There are 12 unique training plans in this chapter. None of them will
be perfectly suited to your needs, because you are much more
individual than these workout schedules are individualized. But, if
you’re training for a 5K, 10K, half-marathon, or marathon, one of
them will suit you well enough to start with. Using the adaptive
running principles and methods you have learned in reading this
book, you’ll have no trouble customizing the most appropriate plan to
make it an even better fit for you. And even if one of the plans seems
perfect when you first look it over, you’ll still have to modify workouts
as you go based on how your body responds to the prescribed
training. Be sure to use the adaptive running guidelines for training
execution discussed in chapter 8 to steer this process.
There are three plans for each of the four popular road-race
distances. The 5K plans are 12 weeks long, the 10K plans last 14
weeks, the half-marathon plans are 16 weeks long, and the
marathon plans last 20 weeks. At each distance there is a level 1
plan, a level 2 plan, and a level 3 plan. The level 1 plans are low
training volume plans for beginners and anyone else who needs or
prefers a low running mileage program. The level 2 plans are
--- PAGE 325 ---
moderate-volume plans for more experienced and competitive
runners. The level 3 plans are high-mileage plans for highly
competitive runners.
Most of the information you need to perform the workouts correctly
is contained within the schedules. For additional details on how to do
easy runs, progression runs, long runs, hill sprints, fartlek runs,
cross-training (“X-Train”) workouts, and strides, refer to the Workout
Key on Chapter 11.
5K Training Plans
The training plans in this section are 12 weeks long and culminate
in a 5K peak race.
--- PAGE 332 ---
10K Training Plans
The training plans in this section are 14 weeks long and culminate
in a 10K peak race.

--- PAGE 341 ---
Half-Marathon Training Plans
The training plans in this section are 16 weeks long and culminate
in a half-marathon peak race.

--- PAGE 351 ---
Marathon Training Plans
The training plans in this section are 20 weeks long and culminate
in a marathon peak race.

--- PAGE 364 ---
FOOTNOTES*1Including peak race
Return to text.
*2Including peak race
Return to text.
*3Including peak race
Return to text.
*4Including peak race
Return to text.
--- PAGE 365 ---
PUBLISHED BY BROADWAY BOOKS
Copyright © 2008 by Brad Hudson and Matt Fitzgerald
All Rights Reserved
Published in the United States by Broadway Books, an imprint of
The Doubleday Publishing Group, a division of Random House, Inc.,
New York.
www.broadwaybooks.com
BROADWAY BOOKS and its logo, a letter B bisected on the
diagonal, are trademarks of Random House, Inc.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hudson, Brad.
Run faster from the 5K to the marathon: how to be your own best
coach / Brad Hudson and Matt Fitzgerald.—1st ed.
p. cm.
1. Running—Training. I. Fitzgerald, Matt. II. Title.
GV1061.5.H83 2008
--- PAGE 366 ---
796.42'4–dc22
                                                                                          200704094
4
eISBN: 978-0-7679-3020-8
v3.0_r2